Whilst the Arab world is busy monitoring the Arab revolutions taking place in our region, and trying to gauge their results and implications, talk about the role of religion in politics and nation-building has once again come to prominence. Indeed, this has become one of the most important topics of concern for public opinion today. It is interesting that this concern does not affect the Arabs exclusively, for there are indications that religion will be an extremely hot topic at the forthcoming US 2012 presidential elections, particularly in light of the clear contrast between the religious background of the different US presidential candidates. In fact, we appear to be facing the most religiously diverse group of US presidential candidates in the history of American presidential elections.

The initial evidence of [the heated religious debate in America] stems from a controversial issue which has repeatedly reared its head in recent months, namely the religious background of current U.S. President Barack Obama, or the “secret Muslim” as he is described by his right-wing critics. Adding further fuel to the religious debate in the US is Republican candidate from the Tea Party movement, Michele Bachman, who is known for her fanatical, evangelical orientation. The same applies to right-wing Republican candidate from Texas, Rick Perry, who is a United Methodist.

Another important Republican candidate, former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney, is a member of the Mormon sect, considered by Christians to be a rogue religious sect for its recognition of the existence of latter-day prophet [Joseph Smith] in America. Mormon teachings differ from those of other Christian denominations, but many Mormons have gone on to become illustrious stars in American society. There is well-known American writer Stephen Covey, author of “The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People”, Bill Marriot, founder of the well-known hotel chain that bears his name, and Glenn Beck, the controversial media figure. Furthermore, Mitt Romney is not the only potential presidential candidate belonging to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; for Republican presidential candidate and former governor of Utah, John Huntsman, is also a Mormon.

As for the other Republican presidential candidates; there is political advisor and gay-rights advocate Fred Karger, who is Jewish, whilst former Speaker of the House of Representatives Newt Gingrich is a Zionist extremist who has belonged to a number of different churches over his career, both Catholic and Protestant. In addition to this, there is successful Afro-American businessman Herman Cain, who is a member of the National Baptist Convention, whilst Congressman Ron Paul is a moderate protestant.

From Pennsylvania, we have former Senator Rick Santorum, a strict Roman Catholic. Whilst the state of Missouri, in Middle America, gives us businessman Vern Wuensche, who belongs to the traditional (Lutheran) protestant church and describes himself as a conservative and devout Christian.

Of course, although she has yet to declare herself as a Republican presidential candidate, we have Sarah Palin, the well-known former governor of Alaska. She has oscillated between various churches throughout her life, in order to highlight her religion without committing to a specific church.

A recent poll conducted in the United States revealed that 68 percent of voters do not care if a candidate is Mormon, while 25 percent explicitly stated that they would not be able to support a Mormon candidate. In comparison, 61 percent of those polled said they would be unable to support a candidate who did not believe in God.

All of this shows that there is solid new ground in the United States today to suggest that spiritual and religious matters – as well as social issues – will be a major topic of debate at the forthcoming presidential elections. This might be considered a “response” to the appalling economic failures in America which have caused serious unemployment, a state of anger and popular despair, increasing poverty, as well as the loss of homes, work and financial stability.

The candidates are aware that nobody possesses a magic wand which can magically transform America’s economic situation, due to the incredible size of public debt caused by previous incompetent budgets and the war machine of former President George W. Bush. Therefore it is easier to talk about social issues and direct public opinion towards such topics. Michelle Bachman launched a test balloon recently when she said that Hurricane Irene, which recently devastated the East Coast of the United States, was a divine punishment from God in response to America’s fiscal policies. This opened the door for religious debate. It served as a “dress rehearsal” [for the US presidential race]; an introduction to the extremely heated confrontations that will take place regarding the issue of religious identity and which will no doubt impact upon future US policies.