Comments: Australia elevates terrorism threat level | The Jakarta PostSept. 12, Online/AP



The Australian government elevated on Friday its terrorism threat level to the second-highest warning in response to the domestic threat posed by Islamic State movement supporters.



Prime Minister Tony Abbott announced the increase from “medium” to “high” on a four-tier scale on the advice of the Australian Security Intelligence Organization (ASIO).



Your comments: 



The alert does nothing for the public. It is intended for the security forces to be aware of the current situation. 



So, we have an indication by the decision maker early in the week, which was hijacked at the end of the week by a politician who is massively failing in the polls, but for what purpose? 



Oh, we will introduce new measures in a week or two, some of which may be required but others not so, which will further deny the public’s right to privacy. 



And it’s all wrapped up in the weasel words by someone who displayed great displeasure at the rejection of the watering down of race and vilification laws. 



Noone



The Australian public knows nothing new besides the fact that a pair of men were arrested on Sept. 10 and charged, and that they have appeared in court and are being held in jail till they appear in court on Oct. 17.    



Omar Succarieh, 31, is accused of providing funds to terrorist organization Jabhat al-Nusra in Syria, preparing for “incursions into a foreign state”, and possessing dangerous drugs.



His co-accused, 21-year-old Agim Kruezi from Boronia Heights, has been charged with preparing for “incursions into a foreign state”, recruiting persons “to join incursions into a foreign state” and unlawfully possessing a category-H weapon. 



He has also been charged with possessing sawed-off firearms and “authority required to possess explosives”.



Also, Attorney-General George Brandis said Friday that the next stage of the Australian government’s new security laws to deal with this perceived threat would be introduced in two weeks’ time.



He said the government’s actions would help protect the Muslim community in Australia.



“It is a sad fact that the wicked people who recruit […] Australian citizens to commit violence, are preying upon the Muslim community so as to encourage their young men to fight in the Middle East,” he said.



Eddy Saf