Groups allegedly spreading ISIL influence throughout regions, says ...Home Affairs Minister Gamawan Fauzi said the government had identified activities allegedly aimed at spreading the influence of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as ISIS, in a number of regions across Indonesia.

“There is an alleged spread of ISIS influence in a number of areas in Indonesia and we are still investigating the cases,” he said in Jakarta on Sunday, as quoted by Antara news agency.

To prevent the radical Islamic ideology from spreading further, Gamawan said the ministry had issued a circular that urged all heads of regions to take measures to put a stop to its reach across the country.

The circular, dated Aug. 7, urged all regional heads to increase coordination and partnerships with all elements of regional leadership, from village to provincial levels, to optimal levels.

“Concerning the spread of ISIS ideology in a number of regions that could potentially have negative impacts on the nation’s ideology of Pancasila and Bhinneka Tunggal Ika [Unity in Diversity] and threaten the unitary state of the Republic of Indonesia (NKRI), the Home Affairs Minister through the Circular Letter No. 450/3806/SJ dated Aug. 7, 2014, asks all governors, mayors and regents to immediately take anticipatory measures to prevent its spread,” the circular stipulated.

It further said that all regional heads should increase collaboration with the Indonesian Military, the National Police, the National Intelligence Agency (BIN), the Immigration Office, the Religious Affairs Ministry and other related institutions in their respective regions to prevent the spread of ISIL ideology.

It was also hoped that mass organizations such as the Early Awareness Society Forum (FKDM), the Interfaith Harmony Forum (FKUB), the Coordination Forum for the Prevention of Terrorism (FKPT) and the Nationality Assimilation Forum (FPK) could work optimally to help local administrations in dealing with the issue.

“We urge all people to not be easily influenced by the ISIS ideology being spread by certain groups or networks,” said the Home Affairs Ministry’s information head, Didik Suprayitno.

He further said the ministry urged all regional heads to immediately file reports with the ministry’s information and communication posts in their respective areas if they found indications of activities that they suspected were related to the spread of the ideology. (ebf)