Islamic parties have strong bargaining position | The Jakarta PostThe head of the Golkar Party’s central executive board, Hajriyanto Thohari, says Islamic political parties currently have a strong bargaining position as they are potential coalition partners that should be counted in the political constellation.

Moreover, he said, the results of quick counts conducted by several pollsters showed that none of the top three political parties – the Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P), the Golkar Party or the Gerindra Party – obtained 20 percent of vote in the 2014 legislative election.

“All three political parties already have presidential candidates so technically, they need other political parties to join them. Therefore, Islamic political parties now have heightened bargaining power,” said Hajriyanto in a discussion in Jakarta on Thursday as quoted by Antara news agency.

The People’s Consultative Assembly speaker added that in such a situation many parties would start to court the Islamic-based-middle-level political parties.

Hajriyanto said Golkar had communicated with the Islamic political parties on possible coalitions.

“From the beginning, we considered that forming a coalition was a certainty. It’s not only mandated by the law [the 2012 Election Law], which requires a political party to win 25 percent of vote, but we are also fully aware that state problems cannot be resolved alone by one political party,” said Hajriyanto.

However, he said, Golkar would still await the recapitulation results of the legislative election from the General Elections Commission (KPU) before deciding its next steps in the formation of a coalition.

Marzuki Alie of the Democratic Party shared a similar opinion, saying that the 2014 elections had the momentum to strengthen both Islamic and middle-level parties.

“Middle-level parties are currently quite strong. They are ‘pretty girls’ worth wooing. The National Awakening Party (PKB) and the Hanura Party, for instance, have extraordinary dynamics. And the strongest parties – PDI-P, Golkar and Gerindra – will be looking for proper parties with which to form a coalition,” said Marzuki. (idb/ebf)