Rethinking Islamic activism: Violence or the democratic way | The ...The rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), what is now self-proclaimed as the Islamic State (IS), has sparked wide public attention, particularly after the release of a video that went viral on the Internet calling on Indonesian jihadists and sympathizers to join the cause. 



For Muslim activists in Indonesia the recent development ignites a contemporary dilemma related to their strategies to achieve the goal to (re-)Islamize society. They will be forced to choose between exercising violence, both physical and psychological, as successfully exemplified, at least temporary, by ISIL, or adopting a democratic way through participation in the country’s political system, which has given them rather unsatisfying results so far — at least since the 1998 reforms.



The main question is why some Islamic social movements, i.e. ISIL and its predecessors like al-Qaeda and affiliates (particularly Jamaah Islamiyah, which operated in Southeast Asia), opted for the violent strategy of indiscriminately killing civilians, including Muslims, to achieve their goals, while other Islamic movements did not. 



As derived from numerous writings on social movement theories, author Mohammed Hafez elucidated three conditions in which Islamic activism (and other movements) are motivated to use violence and become terrorist groups: politico-structural repression that marginalizes them, self-exclusion created as a strategy against repression and the promotion of an anti-system framework as the only way to survive and fight the repression.



As currently exemplified by ISIL, the politico-structural constraints perpetuated by partisan Shia-linked regimes in Iraq and Syria and the continuous US and British interventions have limited, or even blocked the political articulation of radical Sunni groups in the region. The involvement of foreign fighters — including Indonesians — confirms a worldwide discrimination related to the politicization and securitization of Islam, especially since the 2001 start of the global war on terrorism that disproportionally targeted Muslims, particularly Muslim activists. 



The creation of an exclusion strategy had worked as a self-defence system to shield ISIL as an organization and its members from continuous repression and the constraints experienced in the field. The strategy had also been exercised to hinder infiltrations from perceived enemies, as well as to prevent defections that would potentially weaken the group as a whole. Under this self-exclusion policy ISIL halted any political negotiations and compromises with opponents. Importantly, they had strongly approved the use of extensive and indiscriminate violence, including massacring, kidnapping and robbing whoever stands against them; non-Muslim or Muslim, Sunni and Shia alike.



The use of violence has nevertheless not been the only trend within the current circles of the Islamic social movements. Remarking on the compatibility of Islam with democracy, in 2013 Asef Bayat introduced post-Islamism — both as a condition and a socio-political project — which was embraced by Muslim activists around the world through fusing and merging the democratic principles of equality, diversity, human rights and liberty with religiosity, faith and their Islamicized agenda to achieve modernity and prosperity. 



Currently in Indonesia, the latter development has been significantly prominent, especially since the 1998 reformation. The flourishing of Islamic activism — in the fields of faith-based philanthropy and social charities, educational institutions, economic activities, health service provision, missionary missions, political parties and so forth — has shown a remarkable development that has benefited from the ongoing democratization of the country. The growing numbers of a pious and highly educated Muslim middle class that has a strong attachment and commitment to Islamic traditions and practices have provided tremendous support for this Islamo-democratic consolidation. 



The denouncement of ISIL and its extensively violent approach as voiced by major Islamic organizations, including Muhammadiyah, Nahdlatul Ulama, the Indonesian Ulema Council (MUI), the Prosperous Justice Party (PKS) and even a pro-caliphate movement with a critical stance toward democracy, Hizb ut-Tahrir, has indicated a shared recognition of the basic democratic ideas of peace, humanity, justice and freedom.



Yet, there remains a question about whether Muslims, especially Muslim activists, in the country have benefitted politically, socially and economically from the current democratization process. 



Particularly in the field of the national politics, the performance of Islamic political parties has been far from satisfactory, since they cumulatively gained only about 30 to 35 percent support in democratic elections since the 1998 reformation. Furthermore, their mobilization of support for Prabowo Subianto in the latest presidential election seemed to end with a disappointing defeat to Joko “Jokowi” Widodo, who was backed by more pluralistic, secularized and nationalistic political groups.



The political weakness of the Muslim groups seems to have had negative impacts on Islamic activism in the country. With the ruling regime not in their favor, government policies and programs would not privilege the majority Muslims since all citizens enjoy an equal position before the state. To some extent it would be a huge challenge for Muslim activists to get their Islamicized agenda accommodated and facilitated by the state.



Such possible political developments tend to be followed by a potential decline of the confidence of Muslim activists in the prospect of democracy in the country. Notably, democratic confidence has been rising recently, even with hardline Muslim groups. The judicial review filed by the Islam Defenders Front (FPI) in 2013 with the Supreme Court against the presidential decree on the sale of alcoholic beverages illustrated its shifting strategy of these radical movements from an anti-system approach to a democratic way.



Given the rise of ISIL and its call for Indonesian sympathizers to join their ranks, the division between violence and the democratic way seems to be waning among Muslim activists. They have to face the two uneasy challenges of embracing democracy and skilfully articulating their Islamicized agenda in a more open and democratic political environment without any guarantee of success. 



Nevertheless, for the hardline groups a retreat from the democratic way is likely to happen in certain conditions, with the worst-case scenario being the adoption of self-exclusion and the escalation of violence against society to achieve their goals. 





The writer is a lecturer in sociology at the Faculty of Social Science, Yogyakarta State University, and the honorary research fellow at the Institute of Arab and Islamic Studies, University of Exeter, UK.