Your letters: Showcasing RI's Islam at int'l event | The Jakarta PostAmid an ocean of people clad in white, the enchanting voice of Habib Syech bin Abdul Qodir Assegaf grew louder along with the drumming of the humble musical instruments. His melodious voice, expressing his love for the Prophet Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him), beautifully recited the traditional maulid (celebration of prophet birth).



As if under a spell, people started to sway back and forth and left and right to the accelerating rhythm of the hymns. A sense of brotherhood prevailed through the peaceful melody that promoted traditional Sufi piety and opposed religious and political violence. 



Their faces beamed with joy and ecstasy. The rhythmic recitation was acceptable to any ears, regardless of religion, ethnicity, gender, age or background. This event marked the grand opening of the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) Central Bank Governors Meeting held in conjunction with the Indonesia Sharia Economic Festival (ISEF) in Surabaya, East Java, from Nov. 3-9. Despite being attended by around 30,000 people the humble festival passed off smoothly without any major incidents. 



People brought along little candle-like sticks in red and white, a symbol of Indonesia’s national flag and unity. They followed closely the processions in an orderly manner. A minor incident occurred when out of the crowd a green flashlight pointed matter-of-factly at the face of Vice President Jusuf Kalla when delivering his speech. Law enforcers immediately apprehended the culprit and took him into custody.



All in all, the event was a success in showcasing another side of Islam in Indonesia. Participants from diverse countries were immersed in the joy and solemnity of the auspicious event. Some hummed along while others were busy taking pictures, immortalizing the moment. It was indeed a rare event.



Bank Indonesia chose Surabaya as the venue for the first OIC Central Bank Governors Meeting held in Indonesia to have in-depth discussions about sharia-based economic development among OIC members, focusing on raising awareness regarding financial-deepening strategies incorporated with multinational initiatives in collecting zakat (alms) and increasing community participation in the sector. 



Having the highest number of pesantren (Islamic boarding schools) in Indonesia, Surabaya has great potential as a pilot-project site for the center of sharia-based product development in Indonesia. It is imperative to tap the potential revenue from zakat, which so far has not been managed in an efficient and integrated system. Statistics show that in 2012, Indonesia had a potential revenue from zakat of Rp 217 billion (US$18 million), equal to 3.4 percent of the country’s GDP. Unfortunately, in reality it only managed to collect Rp 2.7 trillion.



Zamir Iqbal, lead investment officer of the World Bank expressed his satisfaction at the event as many beneficial discussions paved the way to the adoption of sharia economics.



Ghulam Muhammad Abbasi of the Islamic State Bank of Pakistan said he flew home with “lots of excellent memories of Indonesia’s rich culture and hospitality”. Ammar Hiouani of the Central Bank of Algeria praised the Indonesian people as being “right Muslims.” 



And I was truly blessed to be among the witnesses of such a jubilant occasion.



Yuni Herlina

Depok, West Java