Indonesia and UNAOC: Fostering unity in diversity on a global scale ...“Improbable nation” is the term that Elizabeth Pisani, a renowned American writer, coins to describe Indonesia in her latest book. Collin Brown, a professor from Australia, also refers to our country as an “unlikely nation” in his book. 



 The monikers embody the authors’ shared bewilderment regarding how more than 240 million people with 490 ethnic groups, who speak over 700 mother tongues, profess various faiths and live on a vast archipelago of 17,000 islands can come to feel that they somehow share a common bond. 



We often take it for granted, but the very fact that there is such a thing as “Indonesia” uniting this hodgepodge of myriad different identities is a marvel in itself. 



 Thus, it is fitting for Indonesia to host the 6th Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance of Civilization (UNAOC) in Bali that will take place Aug. 29-30. Under the theme “Unity in Diversity: Celebrating Diversity for Common and Shared Values”,  the UNAOC is an initiative launched by the secretary-general of the United Nations in 2005. It seeks to overcome the prejudice and polarization that has plagued the international community, particularly between the West and the Islamic world, since 9/11. The forum this year will be the first ever convened in the Asia-Pacific.



 The forum is timely, as threats to diversity increasingly loom large across the globe. The ongoing atrocities committed by ISIL (Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant) that fan the flames of sectarian division in the region; the Israeli assaults in Gaza that are intertwined with the rancor between the two peoples; and the continuing tragedy of the Rohingyas Muslims, who remain stateless, offer proof that identity-driven conflicts continue to haunt us. 



 Apparently, despite the globalization that our world has undergone, when it comes to respect for diversity, clouds remain on the horizon.



 The plain truth is that whether we like it or not, diversity is a fact of life. The 7 billion people that live on this planet have a multitude of different identities. We cannot afford to lose our spirit of tolerance. If bigotry against those who are different from us grows even stronger, then we will all be doomed. 



Aside from that, there are tremendous economic benefits generated by diversity. In a survey conducted by Forbes involving 321 major global enterprises, 85 percent agreed or strongly agreed that a diverse workforce was crucial in driving innovation, which is the engine for robust economic growth. In short, embracing diversity is imperative not only for mankind to survive but also to thrive. 



 To this end, the UNAOC is a critical global platform. It can bolster mutual understanding and cooperation through cross-cultural and inter-faith dialogue. It is noteworthy that the UNAOC has pursued inclusive and practical strategies in achieving its objectives — like, for, instance striving to engage youth as one of its chief priorities. In the run-up to the global forum in Bali there will even be a special youth event. 



 Indonesia also has a pivotal role to play by becoming a civilizational bridge. Indonesia has the largest Muslim population in the world and at the same time is the world’s third largest democracy. 



The latest presidential election signals just how vibrant our democracy has become. 



At a time when suspicions between the Islamic world and the West are on the rise, Indonesia should endeavor to show that Islam preaches mercy and need not be seen as antithetical to democracy or human rights. 



Moreover, Indonesia has proposed the adoption of a legally binding instrument against the denigration of faith that will be essential to promoting mutual trust and warding off inflammatory incitements that only fuel further tensions.



 Hosting the UNAOC forum does not mean that we assume the moral high ground. Indeed, we should harness it as an opportunity for us to reflect and to address the lingering challenges that our country faces, including with respect to religious intolerance. We should continue to fight tooth and nail to protect the diversity at home that the overwhelming majority of Indonesians embrace.   



 Fostering trust and harmony between civilizations is no easy feat and will certainly not occur overnight. Nevertheless, the UNAOC Global Forum should reaffirm the international community’s commitment to championing diversity as one of its greatest assets. It will also serve as a platform for strengthening partnerships among all parties to make the world a safer place for diverse populations.



As ferocious conflicts between “us” and “them” persist in many parts of the world, we may think that there is no light at the end of the tunnel. However as the story of Indonesia shows, no matter how “improbable” or “unlikely” it might seem, cherishing unity in diversity is not just desirable, it is also possible. 



___________________ 



The writer works at the Indonesian Foreign Affairs Ministry