Comments: Pope says religion can't justify violence | The Jakarta PostSept. 22, Online/AFP



Pope Francis warned during a visit to Albania on Sunday that religion can never be used to justify violence, making apparent reference to the bloodshed wreaked by Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria. The 77-year-old pontiff said majority-Muslim Albania was an “inspiring example” of religious harmony, as hundreds of thousands thronged the streets of the capital Tirana to greet him.



In a speech to leaders of Albania’s religious communities — including Muslim, Orthodox Bektashi, Jewish and Protestant — Francis took aim at extremists he accused of perverting religion for their own ends.



Your comments: 



We can’t deny that violence is part of human nature. Just look at the history of human civilization.



Violence is one of the “languages” used by human civilization in their interactions, even though it is the kind of language with the worst vocabulary and articulation.



As time goes by, human civilization uses a less violent language as civilization gets more articulate in communicating its aspirations.



But violence will still be part of human nature. To some extent, the use of violence can be morally justified.



Tahu



Unquestionably, the state apparatus has used religion for centuries. However, the watershed of the French Revolution began the demise of that arrangement. One can say that democracies in developed countries have a clear separation of state and religion.  



The major religions now, however, need to move on and concentrate on what religion is all about, which is the spiritual development of the flock. Looked at in this context, religion should have nothing to do with politics, nor with how people live their lives.



If there was any indictment of most religions, it’s that they are largely failures in really developing people’s spirituality.



Pope Francis has at least begun a dialogue over what religion is about. Already he has suggested that issues about sexuality and moral codes are not fundamental to what religion is about. On the other hand, religion in developing countries is on a much lower plane of existence, wallowing in superstition and morality codes.



Jagera



Wow, I know now that Albania is the world’s first atheist state and along that line, Catholic priests, nuns and imams were executed or persecuted while many churches and mosques were razed. Nearly 2,000 Orthodox and Catholic churches were destroyed or transformed into cinemas, theaters and 

dance halls.



Listen to what is being said, not who says it. The real, true message of good (God) can come from anybody’s mouth, even the mouth of your enemy, from a Muslim, Christian or atheist, etc.



Respect the Pope for what he has done to promote non-violence. We Muslims also have a dream of a peaceful and non-violent world.



Santoso