RI talks business with India, NZ and Myanmar | The Jakarta PostPresident Joko “Jokowi” Widodo wrapped up the second leg of his overseas trip on Thursday with a string of bilateral meetings, the prominent one being with India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi. 



Jokowi said that the topics of their discussion mostly revolved around investment opportunities.



“We want to develop our industries, whether we’re going to India or India’s businesses come to us,” the President said.



“Among the potential sectors are coal and defense systems.”



Indonesia’s exports to India, the world’s second most populous country, primarily comprise coal and palm oil.



Jokowi also suggested to Modi, both newly elected to their positions, the importance of ensuring safety of navigation and security at sea.



The two leaders met on the sidelines of the East Asia summit in Myanmar’s capital of Naypyitaw.



Jokowi also met New Zealand Prime Minister John Key on the sidelines of the summit and appealed for the country to participate in investing in geothermal power plants, for which Indonesia has the world’s biggest energy reserves but lacks development.



“Relations between Indonesia and New Zealand can progress further if economic and investment cooperation can be concretely realized, such as in the construction of power plants,” said Jokowi.



Acknowledging New Zealand’s expertise in green energy development, Jokowi pledged to assist New Zealand companies should they encounter problems in their investments in Indonesia.



In response to Jokowi’s request, Key said that New Zealand’s expertise in geothermal energy would definitely help Indonesia in the sector and that he looked forward to the opportunities. 



The President also met with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Thursday on the sidelines of the East Asia summit and renewed Indonesia’s call for concrete action to support Palestine in its protracted conflict with Israel. 



“We conveyed our concern over the Palestine issue, while the secretary-general raised the issues of the Islamic State [IS] and climate change,” said Jokowi. 



“I told him that Indonesia supports the independence of Palestine and that we demanded the UN make more concrete efforts to resolve the issue,” he said. 



Jokowi reiterated to Ban that he would not resort only to a security approach while dealing with the proliferation of IS.



“Using only a hard approach will only fuel the proliferation. That is why we’ll also put forward religious and cultural approaches,” he said. 



Earlier on Wednesday, Jokowi held a bilateral meeting with Myanmar’s President U Thein Sein to affirm Indonesia’s commitment to invest in Myanmar in the telecommunications, mining and energy sectors. 



“Indonesia will encourage its state companies and the private sector to invest in Myanmar,” said Jokowi.



Thein appealed to Jokowi for Indonesian companies to invest more in the agriculture sector, particularly rice production.



The two leaders did not raise the issue of the Rohingnya Muslims, a minority ethnic group in Myanmar denied their most basic human rights and facing the risk of ethnic cleansing.



Jokowi was in Myanmar to attend the ASEAN summit and the East Asia summit after a visit to Beijing, China, for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation. After leaving Myanmar late Thursday, Jokowi was heading for Brisbane, Australia, to attend the G20 summit — a powwow of the world’s 20 biggest economies.