WASHINGTON: The United States will continue, and perhaps even expand, its military and intelligence operations against the Islamic State in Iraq, President Barack Obama has indicated, even as it emerged that Washington refused to consider ransom demand from jihadists to free the now-executed photojournalist James Foley, and even attempted a futile commando operation to rescue him.The immediate focus of US and British attention has now turned to the man now known as "John the Executioner," the terrorist who ripped a knife across Foley neck and executed him for what he said the US attacks on the Islamic state and its Muslim people. Britain has acknowledged, given his accent, that he could be one of its nationals from London's East End. Hundreds of British-Muslims extremists are reported to have gone to Syria and Iraq to fight western forces.Foley's suspected executioner, who has been identified simply by a first name John, is said to be one of a gang of British jihadis known as 'The Beatles' who are guarding western hostages for ISIS. The US and British intelligence community appear confident that he will be identified and brought to justice, the same way Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and Osama bin Laden were."We will not forget what happened, and people will be held accountable, one way or another," US Attorney General Eric Holder said in Washington.Obama on his part was a little more cautious but still unrelenting about the ISIS demands as aired by John the Executioner in the video showing Foley's killing, despite the threats he held out to also execute a second American hostage."We will be vigilant and we will be relentless. When people harm Americans, anywhere, we do what's necessary to see that justice is done. And we act against ISIL, standing alongside others," Obama, who is slowly attracting criticism for being on vacation in the face of various crises, said from Martha's Vineyard.Still, the President, who aides insist is on top of the situation, sent a message that saluted Foley's courage while trashing the aims of the Islamic State. "People like this ultimately fail," he said. "They fail, because the future is won by those who build and not destroy and the world is shaped by people like Jim Foley, and the overwhelming majority of humanity who are appalled by those who killed him."Other unnamed American officials meanwhile disclosed to the media that the US military and intelligence had made strenuous efforts to free Foley, short of negotiating directly with the hostage takers. A commando raid in Syria where Foley was thought to be held turned up empty after a firefight with terrorists.Foley's professional colleagues also indicated that the terrorists had at one time demanded $100 million Euros in ransom to free Foley, and the communication was shared with the US government. Washington's official position is that it does not negotiate with terrorists or consider ransom demands, in contrast to some European countries which pony up ransom money to free its abducted citizens. In fact, according to some accounts, Islamic extremists have made this a regular line of business, earning millions of dollars in revenue from ransom money for kidnapped westerners.The New York Times reported recently that al Qaeda and its direct affiliates had received at least $125 million in revenue from kidnappings since 2008 — primarily from European governments. In the last year alone, they received $66 million.