Would you like to live in the paradise of an Islamic state with full-blown sharia? I mean the self-proclaimed State of ISIS or IS as they like to be called these days, inhabited and controlled by jihadists who want to turn the clock back by at least 1000 years.

All European countries are in a state of shock. Yesterday almost all the national televisions in Europe showed a glimpse of or narrated the incident in which a man speaking in a flawless British accent beheaded an American journalist, James Foley.

The video or the description of a journalist forced into an orange jump-suit being butchered by a masked man dressed in black has shocked the world. Yes, it is barbaric, and not because the life of a westerner is more important than hundreds of thousands of others who have died in Iraq and Syria, but simply because we are now confronting an Islamic terrorist organization which is not absconding but controls territory and has a state.

Welcome to the new world. Al-Qaida is no longer the most dangerous terrorist organization, but ISIS or IS. And we will have to deal with one of the wealthiest terrorist organizations ever in the known history of mankind. They have amassed wealth by controlling vast areas with oil reserves, collecting money by demanding ransom, looting banks, receiving donations, etc.

I think that the world community has to get together to solve this problem. India and Russia will have to do their part as well. Al-Qaida, which was playing a cat and mouse game in the mountainous regions of Afghanistan in the poorest region of the world, did not have the resources nor the capacity to strike back. IS/ISIS, on the contrary, has acquired sophisticated weapons, and motivated and disillusioned Muslim youths from European countries have become their ideological base. There are twice as many Brits today fighting for ISIS than there are Muslim youths enrolled in the British army.

The European countries will have to take a serious debate about those sleeping cells and how radicalization is taking place in Western countries. Meanwhile, it is important to realize that the time to act is now. The world community has to show some resolve to end this so-called experiment of a sharia paradise, where women are forced to wear a niqab or burka, where the whole body is covered and not even an inch of flesh should be seen. In this paradise the jihadist fighters can knock on any door and forcibly take young girls and force them to marry one of the fighters.

Not only are women forced to cover their bodies, even sheep and goats are forced to cover the rear parts of their bodies so that they do not tempt the holy men fighting jihad. Beheading, chopping off hands, stoning and such inhuman treatment is being handed out to people in the land where sharia is the supreme law.

Internationally, Barack Obama should quickly wind up this conflict with Russia about Ukraine. The West has enough worries to take care of. Let Russia, which historically has enjoyed influence on Ukraine, get an opportunity to act responsibly. This will motivate Russia to engage in this global fight against jihadism.

All civilized nations of the world need urgently to act before more inhuman beheadings of innocent people is carried out to weaken our resolve. India should also do its part to help USA in its effort to contain this global malaise.