WASHINGTON: Frontline reporting has taken another body blow. American freelance photojournalist James Foley, who had been missing for nearly two years after he was believed kidnapped in Syria, has been brutally beheaded by the so-called Islamic State extremists in Iraq.Foley's family confirmed his death after ISIS released a video of the beheading and it was briefly posted on YouTube before being taken down. It elicited strong condemnation and outrage all around even as ISIS threatened to kill Steven Sotloff, another hostage it said it had in its custody.Titled "A Message to America," the video shows Foley, clad in an orange jumpsuit of the kind work by Guantanamo Bay prisoners, kneeling in a desert landscape. A masked ISIS terrorist standing to his left says Foley's execution is in retaliation for the recent American airstrikes ordered by President Barack Obama against the extremist group in Iraq."As a government you have been at the forefront in the aggression against the Islamic State... your strikes has cause casualties among Muslims," the terrorist in the Foley video says, in what sounds like a British accent. "Any attempt by you, Obama, to deny the Muslims their rights of living in safety under the Islamic caliphate will result in the bloodshed of your people."Foley himself is heard speaking in the video. "I call on my friends, family and loved ones to rise up against my real killers - the US government - for what will happen to me is only a result of their complacent criminality," he says, in a statement he is ostensibly tutored to make. He says when American soldiers began dropping bombs on Iraq this month, "they signed my death certificate."In Washington, a White House National Security Council spokesperson said the US "intelligence community is working as quickly as possible to determine its authenticity. If genuine, we are appalled by the brutal murder of an innocent American journalist."Foley's family left little doubt that they believed the video to be true, issuing a brave and heartrending statement. "We have never been prouder of our son Jim. He gave his life trying to expose the world to the suffering of the Syrian people. We implore the kidnappers to spare the lives of the remaining hostages. Like Jim, they are innocents. They have no control over American government policy in Iraq, Syria or anywhere in the world," his mother Diane Foley said on the Facebook page the family had created to publicize their son's disappearance.The gut-wrenching episode recalled the horror of a similar execution nearer home almost 12 years ago when Wall Street Journal Reporter Daniel Pearl was decapitated in Karachi. Although 9/11 "mastermind" Khalid Sheikh Mohammed was eventually accused of the murder, the larger conspiracy behind the killing was never fully exposed nor were they held accountable.The British accent of the Foley killer also turned the focus on London , a city so indulgent of Islamic extremists, including rabid preachers, that it has been dubbed Londonistan. A 2006 book on the subject was titled Londonistan: How Britain is Creating a Terror State Within.