NEW DELHI: The term Yazidi translates into "worshippers of god" and this group is one of the world's oldest monotheistic minorities.They follow a faith born in Mesopotamia more than 4,000 years ago. It is rooted in Zoroastrianism but has, over time, blended in elements of Islam and Christianity. Yazidis pray to God three times a day facing the sun and worship his seven angels — the most important of which is Melek Taus, or Peacock angel.Followers of the Yazidi religion perform rituals at their holy Lalish temple at the Mountains of Shikhan near Dahuk, 430km northwest of Baghdad, on, August 11, 2014. (AP photo)Yazidis discourage marriage outside the community and even across their caste system. Their unique beliefs and practices — some are known to refrain from eating lettuce and wearing the colour blue — have often been misconstrued as satanic. Orthodox Muslims consider the peacock a demon figure and refer to Yazidis as devil worshippers.The Yazidis are at the risk of extinction due to the onslaught of Islamist jidahists on the town of Sinjar.Followers of the Yazidi religion attend a gathering in a home near the historic temple of Yazidis in the village of Lalesh, on February 15, 2003 in northern Iraq. (Getty Images file photo)The town, near the Syrian border, is a hub for Yazidis.The Yazidis have been pushed out of houses and into the treacherous Sinjar mountains where basic necessities such as food and water have been scarce. Those that have refused to move from their houses are being viciously hunted down by Islamic State.Stories of brutality and complete anarchy are almost commonplace. Hundreds of women and young girls have been taken away as brides for jihadis and given the choice of conversion or death, according to the refugees, several of whom said they had received phone calls from their daughters or sisters before their cellphone batteries and credit ran out.An Iraqi Yazidi man lights candles near the holy Lalish temple in the Mountains of Shikhan near Dahuk, 430km northwest of Baghdad, on August 11, 2014. (AP photo)As non-Arab and non-Muslim Iraqis, Yazidis have long been one of the country's most vulnerable minorities. Persecution under Saddam Hussein forced thousands of families to flee the country. Germany is home to the largest community abroad, with an estimated 40,000.(With inputs from Agencies)