The town of Kobane (also spelt Kobani) on the Syria-Turkey border has emerged as the latest focus in the war against Islamic State (IS). The town, besieged by IS jihadis from three sides, is being valiantly defended by Kurdish fighters belonging to the Kurdish People’s Protection Unit. Although the Kurds are being supported by US-led air strikes, they continue to be outnumbered on the ground by IS fighters. The last couple of weeks have seen intense battles in Kobane, including street fighting, with the Kurds pledging to fight on till the last drop of their blood.

There’s no denying that Kobane has become an emotive issue, as well as a critical test of the US-led air strikes against IS. Already comparisons are being made between Kobane and the World War II battle of Stalingrad. Needless to say should Kobane fall it will be a huge victory for IS, which will come to control a large stretch of Syria’s border. However, if Kobane survives it will be a huge boost for the anti-IS forces in Iraq and Syria. It will also prove that the IS advance, which hitherto has been spectacular, can be halted and towns and cities successfully defended against the jihadis.

But for the latter outcome the Kurds in Kobane need all the help they can get. Only over the last two days have the US-led air strikes in and around Kobane been ramped up in intensity with 22 such strikes targeting IS units. While this allowed the Kurdish fighters in the town to make some significant gains, much more needs to be done. Second, Turkey cannot remain a mute spectator to the events unfolding in Kobane. Already conspiracy theories are floating around that Ankara’s refusal to allow Turkish Kurds to cross the border and join their brethren in Kobane in the fight against IS is motivated by a desire to see the jihadis destroy/weaken the Kurdish movement in Syria and Turkey.

If Turkey seriously believes that it is better to have IS as neighbours, then its leadership is truly living in cuckooland. Moreover, as a Nato ally, Turkey has added responsibility to aid the coalition against IS. It simply can’t afford to play a double game here. In fact, Ankara’s refusal to act in Kobane’s favour is likely to create a much bigger Kurdish problem as frustration among Turkish Kurds grows.

‘Save Kobane’ has become a clarion call not just for those against IS but also for those who love freedom, democracy and liberal values. The international community simply must stand by Kobane and its Kurdish defenders in their hour of need.