CUDDALORE: In March this year, Usman Ali of Paranagipettai near Cuddalore, a picturesque coastal village north of Tamil Nadu, was shaken out of his stupor. It was a call on his wife Rokhyaa's mobile. Their son Haja Fakkurudeen (37) had phoned to say he was well and his dream had come true. He was now living in Syria with wife Ayesha Siddika and their three children, and fighting alongside ISIS (Islamic State of Iraq and Syria) militants against the Bashar al-Assad regime. The voice crackled after a brief exchange of words and the connection snapped.That was the last a shattered Usman and his wife heard from Fakkurudeen, who is believed to be among 80-odd Muslim youths from India who have joined the war against the Syrian and Iraqi regimes. "My wife, son-in-law and I tried hard to prevent him from going to Syria. But his mind had been made up. He used to contribute a good part of his salary for ISIS. He said it was his dream to live in an Islamic country," said Usman, who depended on his son's income to run the house.Fakkurudeen had left the village, where fishing is one of the key occupations, a decade ago. He remained a Singapore citizen before ISIS's call to arms proved too big an attraction to resist. It was during a vacation in Tamil Nadu in October last year that he informed his dismayed family about his plan to enrol in the insurgents' campaign to create a caliphate.He remained a Singapore citizen before ISIS's call to arms proved too big an attraction to resist.Parangipettai, named Portonovo by early Portuguese rulers, is on an ancient trade route. In the heart of the village, the Muslim quarter is a pretty picture of century-old homes juxtaposed with modern bungalows in bright green, blue and purple, all built by immigrants to the Gulf, Singapore and Malaysia. Underneath the calm though, trouble is brewing.It was here that Gul Mohammad Maraikar (37) returned after he was deported by Singapore for allegedly distributing 'jihadist' literature among a group of youths which included his friend Fakkurudeen. Indian Mujahideen operative Ashraf Ali, accused of setting up sleeper modules in Jodhpur, took refuge in the same village by posing as a preacher of a Delhi-based Jamaath before he was arrested by Rajasthan's anti-terror squad last month. K Qutbuddin (24), a Parangipettai resident, was also picked up by the state police last week for alleged involvement in the murder of a Hindu Munnani leader in Chennai.The village is one among a string of several such spots across south India where impressionable Muslim youth are being constantly exposed to radical online propaganda. Police sources say at least five TN youths from different regions have been dissuaded in recent months by the police from going to Syria and Iraq to fight for the ISIS.He is fighting alongside ISIS (Islamic State of Iraq and Syria) militants against the Bashar al-Assad regime."Our plan is to get them off the jihadist path. We don't intend arresting them," said a senior officer, seeking anonymity. Armed with tip-offs about radicalized youths, said to be in their 20s, gearing up to leave for Syria via Dubai and Turkey, police have fanned out across Tamil Nadu over the last few months to talk to them. "Parents have also helped us by keeping a close watch over their wards," said the officer.