WASHINGTON: US warplanes bombed Islamist fighters marching on Iraq's Kurdish capital in the north on Friday after President Barack Obama said Washington must act to "prevent genocide".Militants of the Islamic State (formerly ISIS, Islamist State of Iraq and Syria), who have beheaded and crucified captives in their drive to eradicate unbelievers, have advanced to within a half hour's drive of Irbil, capital of Iraq's Kurdish region and a hub for US oil companies. US airlines and other commercial carriers have been barred from flying over Iraq except in emergencies.A Pentagon spokesman said two F/A-18 fighter jets from an aircraft carrier in the Gulf had dropped bombs on a mobile artillery piece used by the fighters to shell Kurdish forces defending Irbil. Obama had on Thursday authorized air strikes against the Sunni Islamic extremists even as he pledged not to return US ground troops to the region.Ahead of the strike, US aircraft dropped food and water to Yazidi minorities trapped on Mount Sinjar, driven out by the ISIS and facing annihilation. The actions constituted the deepest American engagement in Iraq since US troops withdrew in late 2011 after nearly a decade of war.President Barack Obama speaks about the situation in Iraq in the state dining room at the White House in Washington. (AP photo)The US President, who campaigned on a platform of extricating US troops from Iraq and Afghanistan, suggested his hand was forced by barbaric militants of the ISIS advancing on Irbil, a nerve centre of US operations in Iraq."People are starving. And children are dying of thirst. Meanwhile, ISIS forces below have called for the systematic destruction of the entire Yazidi people," Obama explained to Americans in a late-night address from the White House, saying when the US has the unique capabilities to help avert a massacre, it is the American thing to take action.Handout photo shows sailors guiding an F/A-18C Hornet on the flight deck of the aircraft carrier USS George HW Bush in the Gulf. (Via Reuters)"That is our responsibility as Americans. That's a hallmark of American leadership. That's who we are," the US President told a nation that is largely sceptical of getting entangled in foreign crises again after two wars that have cost more than a trillion dollars and thousands of casualties.US officials said Pentagon has been authorized to launch air strikes against ISIS extremists if the military determines that Iraqi government troops and Kurdish forces are unable to break the mountain siege and there is imminent danger of massacre of the trapped people. Danger to nearly 1000 US personnel in Baghdad and Irbil, both under threat from rampaging ISIS forces, will also precipitate air strikes.An Iraqi Yazidi woman who fled the violence in the northern Iraqi town of Sinjar, cries as she stands among others at a school where they are taking shelter in the Kurdish city of Dohuk in Iraq's autonomous Kurdistan region. (AFP photo)Obama's turnaround, which came after weeks of resisting military action, followed continuing ISIS advances in Iraq that a token infusion of about 700 US military personnel failed to stem. ISIS extremists continued to overrun government-controlled towns and cities and they turned on the semi-autonomous Kurdish region, whose rugged and well-armed fighters banding under the US backed peshmerga were thought to be more than a match for the extremists.But ISIS extremists, looting US military equipment as they swept across the country, outgunned the peshmerga and threatened the multi-religious Kurds and minorities, particularly Christians and Yazidis, demanding that they should either convert to Islam, pay a special tax or be prepared for extermination. Washington fears a bloodbath is imminent.Iraqi Christians who fled the violence in the village of Qaraqush, about 30 kilometres east of the northern province of Nineveh, rest upon their arrival at the St Joseph church in the Kurdish city of Arbil, in Kurdistan region. (AFP photo)The Obama administration meantime faces the delicate task of supporting the Kurds, who have long sought an independent state in the region, only to the extent of defending themselves and remaining in the multi-ethnic fabric of countries such as Iraq and Turkey, a US ally that also has a large Kurdish minority yearning for independence.Kurdish pop star Helly Luv poses alongside Kurdish peshmerga troops at a base in Dohuk, norther Iraq. (Reuters photo)Obama has suggested repeatedly that the US has no desire to feed into any latent separatist fires in the region, although redrawn maps and boundaries in the region have long been making the rounds in Washington. "And so even as we support Iraqis as they take the fight to these terrorists, American combat troops will not be returning to fight in Iraq, because there's no American military solution to the larger crisis in Iraq," he said in Thursday night's address."The only lasting solution is reconciliation among Iraqi communities and stronger Iraqi security forces," he added.