With foreign ministers from 40 countries, including 10 Arab states, shaking hands for a new coalition against Islamic State (IS) it is clear that recent beheadings of hostages — incorporated in video messages to the West — have shaken world leaders. It is less clear what form this action will take and the devil lies in the detail. US secretary of state John Kerry’s marathon flying diplomacy in the region welded this new coalition together. Significantly for the first time Saudi Arabia has joined other Sunni states to militarily take on IS terrorism. They have banded together around an American president who is a reluctant war-maker — having pulled out of Iraq in 2010 and now getting ready to exit Afghanistan — but also one who has vowed to “degrade and ultimately destroy” IS.

The new solidarity is welcome but key concerns remain. The first is the role of Iran which has significant assets on the ground to take on IS. Iran is a powerful potential ally whose influence cannot be ignored. At a time when Americans stress that all international military action must first be approved by Baghdad, Iran — overtly or covertly — will have a balancing role and must be brought in.

Secondly, even as French warplanes fly reconnaissance missions over Iraq and key Arab states get ready for air strikes, powerful allies like Turkey remain reluctant for anything but humanitarian and logistics operations. As British Prime Minister David Cameron says, IS terrorists are not Muslims but monsters. Muslim countries must shed their reluctance. This is a different kind of enemy from even al-Qaida and half-hearted measures will not work. With IS terrorists clouding the fair name of Islam, old-style cynical politics of hunting with the hounds and running with the hares won`t work anymore.

Another imponderable is the role of Syria’s Bashar al-Assad, denounced recently as a ‘brutal dictator’. The US government is going to Congress with a $500 million proposal to support Syrian moderates but it’s doubtful whether they have any militarily significant ground presence. Since IS can easily fall back on Syrian bases, the coalition will need a working understanding with Assad if it is to succeed. US vice-president Joe Biden has sworn to follow IS terrorists to “the gates of hell”. But F-16s alone do not a strategy make. How Arabs, Americans and Iranians negotiate this fog of war will impact us all.