Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution

An army recruitment rally will be organized at Government PG college ground in Mandsaur from December 9 to 16. Candidates of 29 districts of the state will take part in the rally on the days allotted to their respective districts.

On the occasion of the World Fisheries Day, Union agriculture minister Radha Mohan Singh says the government will launch 'Blue Revolution' as a major thrust to increase fish production and productivity in the country.

Islamic State, fighting to redraw the map of the Middle East, has been coaching Egypt's most dangerous militant group, complicating efforts to stabilize the biggest Arab nation.

Goa's very own queens of the 64-square, Bhakti Kulkarni and Ivana Furtado have been the reason for the rise of the state as a force to reckon with in India

In a statement issued on Friday evening, National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden confirmed that Kassig was being held by Islamic State militants.

The Iraqi military command has launched a campaign to re-enlist soldiers and officers who abandoned their units, a crucial step in its effort to rebuild an army that has been routed in battle after battle by Islamic State jihadists.

Girls kissed girls. Guys kissed guys. Girls and guys kissed each other.Students at University of Hyderabad were kissing for a cause - the right to express themselves, without the fear of moral police.

Residents of a Turkish border town, an hour's drive from where Islamic State is battling for control of Kobani, appreciate the quiet they say the Sunni militants brought when they swiftly seized neighbouring Syrian territory.

Eight hundred Iraqi soldiers were divided into lines of ten men, given rushed interrogations by Islamic State fighters and shot dead, the survivor said. By dawn, he was one of only 20 left alive.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi calls for Blue Revolution to promote fisheries. He says we have to tap the potential by helping Indian fishermen.

Guardians are protesting at the school in Baghajatin where an outsider had entered into a girl's toilet.

Islamic Education Centre for Women will organise an Islamic conference on 'journey to eternity' at Town Hall here on February 25.

An open army recruitment rally for eligible male youth of Goa State will be conducted by the Army Recruiting Office of Kolhapur at 6 Technical Training Regiment, Ponda from  November 12   to 14.

The Animal Welfare Board of India has written to the army cantonment board at Deolali not to relocate stray dogs from Deolali as it amounts to animal cruelty.

​ Friday will be the last day of the Armed Forces Tribunal in Bangalore. In order to enable the litigants from Karnataka to file cases coming under the purview of Armed Forces Tribunal Act, the Armed Forces Tribunal was being conducted from July 28.

Recruitment  for the Infantry Battalion of the Territorial Army will be held  on  August 5 in Bangalore.  Candidates in the age group of 18 to 42  with a minimum height, chest and weight of 160 cms, 77 cms and 50 kg, respectively  and matric passed with 45% marks,  are eligible for Soldier General Duty (available vacancy 11).   The candidates must be domicile of Andhra Pradesh / Gujarat / Goa / Karnataka/Kerala/Maharashtra/Rajasthan/Tamil Nadu/Territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli / Daman & Diu /Lakshadweep  /  Pondicherry.

​ General Dalbir Singh, on Thursday took over as the 26th Chief of Army Staff (COAS).

It would be last visit of the outgoing army chief at army's one of the advanced, Western Command on western theater. He is going to retire on July 31.

DHVANI  system -- which will help Army personnel in perfecting marksmanship skills by accurately determining the location of bullet impact and providing real-time feedback during training --  will formally be handed over to the Indian Army in Secunderabad this afternoon.

The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) develops state-of-the-art marksmanship (shooting) training system (DHVANI) for Indian Army. The sophisticated acoustic sensor-based system will help the Army to develop shooting techniques of its combat personnel during training.

1)       Nexter Systems, Larsen & Toubro and Ashok Leyland Defence Systems have recently signed a consortium agreement to collaborate for the mounted gun system (MGS) artillery programme of the Indian Army. ET NOW turns 5. Watch No1 Biz News Channel of India for unbiased coverage of Markets and Economy.