Finally highlighting his strategy to combat the threat posed by the Islamic State (IS) in Iraq and Syria, US President Barack Obama has said that America will expand military strikes and engage a broad coalition of allies to counter the jihadis. The announcement marks a clear transition to an offensive strategy from the hitherto defensive position that Washington had adopted to the problem. The immediate consequences of the policy shift will see US airstrikes against IS targets in Syria, training of so-called moderate Syrian rebels to fight IS and more US military advisers in Iraq to train, equip and advise Iraqi and Kurdish forces fighting IS jihadis on the frontlines.

Although Obama was categorical in asserting that the new US strategy did not signal a return to war in the Middle East, there is little doubt that the measures will ensure that Washington remains engaged in the region for the foreseeable future. Policy-watchers were quick to point out that no exit time-table has been highlighted either. Having said that, the US has a special obligation to intervene because it is the only country with the wherewithal to do so. Clearly, left to their own devices Iraqi and Kurdish forces run the risk of being overrun by IS in a matter of weeks.

Besides, the US is responsible for this mess in the first place – albeit the previous Bush administration needs to take the blame for this. The seeds of IS were sown way back in 2003 with the US military intervention in Iraq toppling the Saddam Hussein regime. Thus, Washington simply cannot cut and run now. But let’s come back to Obama’s plan of action. Expanding the scope of US airstrikes into Syria will be tricky simply because, unlike in Iraq, Washington and Damascus don’t see eye to eye. So if the US goes ahead with this course of action it will be unilaterally transgressing the sovereign airspace of another country without the latter’s consent.

Unless of course the Obama administration has reached some sort of secret understanding with the Bashar al-Assad regime. But that seems unlikely given the fact that Obama has ruled out working with Damascus and has called for $500 million in funding for a Pentagon programme to train the moderates among the Syrian rebels fighting the Assad regime to also combat IS. This is a recipe for disaster. One must remember that IS was created with America’s blessings and funding and training from Saudi Arabia to topple Assad. Now America wants to equip the ‘moderate’ rebels and Saudi Arabia has once again offered to train them.

Anyone with half a brain should know this plan is bound to fail. One would expect Obama’s policy planners to know that the strategy ‘If at first you don’t succeed, try, try again’ is not the best one to follow in this scenario. If the US is truly serious about building a grand coalition to combat IS, it must directly cooperate with Syria and Iran. While this would be a reversal of American policy, it would be a small price to pay for neutralising IS, which is capable of hurting American citizens – as highlighted by the beheadings of American journalists Steve Sotloff and James Foley – and even striking US shores in future.

Of course, no one is saying that Obama solely rely on Damascus and Tehran. Given IS’s rapid rise in operational capabilities and influence, a grand coalition of countries against it must also include Morocco, India and the Gulf Cooperation Council Arab states. If Obama is serious about tackling the IS menace, he must start thinking outside the box and refrain from falling back on the old American strategy of propping up proxies who end up becoming even more of a problem than the one they were meant to solve. The IS phenomenon bears testimony to this.