LONDON: A British national named Kabir Ahmed has been named as the first foreign fighter who has carried out a suicide bombing mission for Islamic State (IS).

Ahmed, also known as Abu Sammyh Al Brittani, who is from Derby is believed to have carried out the attack on Friday when a truck packed with explosives was driven into the convoy of Lt Gen Faisal Malik Zamel, who was inspecting forces in the town of Beiji, north of Baghdad.He was killed along with seven other police officers and 15 people were wounded.Interestingly, Ahmed has earlier told a BBC programme that he wanted to become a suicide bomber.The foreign office has said it was "aware of reports of the death of a British national in Iraq".Senior Fellow at the International Centre for the Study of Radicalism at King's College London, Shiraz Maher posted on Twitter three pictures of Ahmed, who claimed he was the suicide bomber.He tweeted "British foreign fighter, Abu Sumayyah from Derby carried out a suicide bombing in Baiji, Iraq, yesterday. This makes two British suicide bombers in the Syria/Iraq conflict. First was Abu Sulaiman for Jabhat al-Nusrah, now Abu Sumayyah for IS"."British suicide bomber in Iraq, Abu Sumayyah (Kabir Ahmed) originally joined Jund al-Sham in Syria and then moved to Islamic State. Abu Sumayyah (Kabir Ahmed), British suicide bomber in Iraq, was 32, married, and had children".Britain recently issued a worldwide terrorism warning for British tourists. The Foreign Office warned of a serious terror threat to tourists across the world due to the British military intervention against ISIS in Iraq and Syria. British holidaymakers travelling anywhere in the world have been told to be "extremely vigilant" as they are at risk of being attacked by Islamist terrorists.Up to 500 Britons are thought to have travelled to the Middle East to fight for ISIS.Prime minister David Cameron said "ISIS is not a problem restricted to just one region. It has murderous plans to expand its borders well beyond Iraq and Syria, and to carry out terrorist atrocities right across the world. It is recruiting new fighters from all over the world. Around 500 have gone there from my country Britain, and one of them almost certainly brutally murdered two American journalists and a British aid worker. This is a problem that affects us all. And we must tackle it together".He added "The root cause of this terrorist threat is a poisonous ideology of Islamist extremism. This is nothing to do with Islam, which is a peaceful religion which inspires countless acts of generosity every day. Islamist extremism on the other hand believes in using the most brutal forms of terrorism to force people to accept a warped world view and to live in a quasi-mediaeval state. To defeat ISIS we must defeat this ideology in all its forms".