LONDON: British hostage John Cantlie's sister has made a moving appeal to ISIS to resume negotiations over the release of her brother.In a statement issued on Monday night, Jessica Cantlie said she was speaking as the head of the Cantlie family because her father, Paul, was terminally ill and incapacitated.She then called on ISIS who are holding her brother for over two years to reopen dialogue, saying: "We implore ISIS to reinitiate direct contact".The appeal comes days after John's father Paul made an emotional appeal to the terrorist group from his hospital bed for his son to be released and returned "to those who love him".Speaking with the help of a voice aid, Paul said his family was overjoyed seeing John for the first time in two years after he appeared in a televised broadcast. The son's messages however then left the family with "despair and helplessness".On Monday night, Jessica said "I am John's sister. We, John's family, want to address Islamic State, who are holding him. In the recent 'broadcast' of 'Lend me your Ears' and within your online publication 'Dabiq', John's words are powerful and have huge resonance. It is not true to say that there has been no attempt to engage with I.S. It is simply not accurate. This is frustrating for all parties, including those who are trying to assist us. We had previously been in contact through a channel started by you, but then this stopped for reasons best known to you. Sadly, like the families of David Haines and Alan Henning before they were killed, our efforts at re-opening dialogue continue to be ignored by those holding John".She added "We strongly challenge those holding John to return to your previously opened channel, to which we continue to send messages and await your response so that in keeping with everyone's wishes, we can restart dialogue. We implore IS to reinitiate direct contact".John Cantlie has appeared in four online videos released by ISIS. Wearing an orange jumpsuit like prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, he has delivered propaganda messages in each film in a bid to save his life.The freelance journalist is from Haslemere, Surrey.In a 3 minute 20 second clip posted on YouTube, John Cantlie says that he reached Syria in November 2012 "where I was subsequently captured by the Islamic State. Now nearly two years later many things have changed including the expansion of the Islamic State to include large areas of eastern Syria and western Iraq. A landmass bigger than Britain and many other nations".The video was called "Lend Me Your Ears" and was addressed to the Western public.Cantlie, 43 year old explains that he used to work for some of the bigger newspapers and magazines in the UK."Now I know what you're thinking, you're thinking: 'He's only doing this because he's a prisoner. He's got a gun at his head and he's being forced to do this,' right? Well it's true I am a prisoner that I cannot deny but seeing as I've been abandoned by my government and my fate now lies in the hands of Islamic State I have nothing to lose. Maybe I will live and maybe I will die, but I want to take this opportunity to convey some facts that you can verify. Facts that if you contemplate might help preserving lives"."Over the next few programmes, I'm going to show you the truth as the western media tries to drag the public back to the abyss of another war with the Islamic State. After two disastrous and hugely unpopular wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, why is it that our governments appear so keen to get involved in yet another unwinnable conflict? I'm going to show you the truth behind these systems and motivation of the Islamic State, and how the western media, the very organisation I used to work for can twist and manipulate that truth to the public back home".He further states "There are two sides to every story - think you're getting the whole picture? And I'll show you the truth behind what happened when many European citizens were imprisoned and later released by the Islamic State and how the British and American governments thought they could do it differently to every other every other European country.