Two youths from Maharashtra — one of whom is a suspected SIMI operative and the other an aide of Indian Mujahideen media in-charge — were arrested from Secunderabad on Wednesday.

Posing as a member of banned Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), an unemployed engineering graduate called up his landlord, an official with Narmada Valley Development Authority (NVDA), demanding Rs 15 lakh.

The five SIMI fugitives wanted for Bijnor blast operated on al-Qaida pattern.

Five members of banned Students' Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), who escaped during the Khandwa jailbreak in October, are suspected to be involved in the bank heist at Satna on Saturday.

It is either unsubstantiated charges or sloppy investigative work on the part of the police that has resulted in the acquittal of activists of Student Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) in three cases in the city during the last two months.

Three SIMI terrorists, allegedly involved in a blast on September 12 in Mohalla Jatan of Bijnor, had managed to escape after the incident.

A threat letter purportedly sent by terrorist organisation Hizbul Mujahideen (HuM) created sensation in the civil court here on Friday evening. The terror organisation sent the letter to the district judge through courier in which it threatened to blow up the court and the residence of upper sessions judge of Bahraich.

The duo, who are natives of Maharashtra, were reportedly in contact with three residents of Saidabad in their endeavour to go to Afghanistan for jihad training.

In order to facilitate proper and punctual running of more than 200 Ganpati Special trains Konkan Railway has severely restricted movement of goods Trains, including RORO on its system.

​​City police chief R Hithendra has ordered temporary changes in traffic flow along the Ratha Beedhi in Kateel from 8am on May 25 to 6pm on May 26 on account of six yakshagana troupes of Kateel Sri Durgaparameshwari Temple performing at a time on the temple precincts during the period.

Election Commission of India has said that any person who is in possession of information relating to movement of huge amount of cash and other movable assets during the period of election may inform about the same to the directorate of income-tax (investigation), income-tax department for appropriate action. The twenty four hour cntrol room number 080-22866916 or 1800-425-7707.

The department of sociology, school of social sciences and international studies, Pondicherry University will be holding a two-day conference on 'Social movements and inclusive development: Contestations, contradictions and challenges' on March 5 and 6 in the UMISARC Auditorium, silver jubilee campus.

Chairman of Sahara group is likely to be shifted out of Kukrail forest on Monday noon.

In a meeting of the community leaders, activists and lawyers held here today it was decided to launch a nationwide campaign to repeal Unlawful Activities Activates (Prevention) Act (UAPA). It was decided to hold a public gathering -"People's Conference against UAPA" in New Delhi on March 5.

13483 Farakka express will be rescheduled on Wednesday at 7.30 am instead of 7.10 pm on Tuesday.

22405 Garib Rath express was also rescheduled on Tuesday. It departed at 5.30 pm instead of 1.30 pm.

Train number 12367 Vikrmashila express was rescheduled on Tuesday. It departed at 6.30 pm instead of 11.15 am.

Train number 12321 Howrah-CSTM Mumbai mail will remain rescheduled on Wednesday. It will run at 12.30 am instead of its previous time of 10 pm on Tuesday.

Train number 12556 Hissar-Gorakhpur express was rescheduled at 5.35 pm on Tuesday. Train number 12311 Howrah-Kalka mail will be rescheduled on Wednesday. It will run at 1 am instead of 7.40 pm on Tuesday.

The railway authorities have also rescheduled the movement of a number of trains. 12142 Rajendra Nagar-CSTM express is rescheduled at 11.30 am instead of 10.40 am. 13237 Patna-Kota is scheduled at 3 pm instead of 11.50 am.

Islamic Education Centre for Women will organise an Islamic conference on 'journey to eternity' at Town Hall here on February 25.