Islamic State plot in Australia raises questions The Islamic State plot to carry out random beheadings in Sydney alleged by police is a simple and barbaric scheme that has shaken Australians. But terrorism experts on Friday questioned whether the ruthless movement had the capacity or inclination to sustain a terror campaign so far from the Middle East.

Pak Taliban fires its spokesman over allegiance to Islamic State Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan has fired its spokesman after he along with five other commanders declared allegiance to the Islamic State terror group, which has been vying for supremacy with the al-Qaida in the region.

US, defending Kurds in Syria, expands airstrikes against Islamic State militants The Pentagon said on Saturday that it had conducted its first strikes against Islamic State targets in a besieged Kurdish area of Syria along the Turkish border, destroying two armored vehicles in an area that has been the subject of a weeklong onslaught by the Islamic State.

Islamic State group visits Pakistan militants: Jundullah spokesman A spokesman for a small Pakistani militant group claims that a delegation from the Islamic State group has visited Jundallah's leaders in southwestern Pakistan.

Saudi Arabia's clerics condemn Islamic State but preach intolerance Many of Saudi Arabia's popular clerics preach a doctrine that encourages intolerance against the very groups targeted by Islamic State in Iraq.

Lucknow youth group holds Islamic aptitude test and quiz A group of volunteers in old city area have developed an aptitude test to judge a person's understanding of Islamic teachings and Quranic preaching.

Iraqi army woos deserters back to war on Islamic State The Iraqi military command has launched a campaign to re-enlist soldiers and officers who abandoned their units, a crucial step in its effort to rebuild an army that has been routed in battle after battle by Islamic State jihadists.

World leaders to gather at UN in shadow of Islamic State, Ebola crises World leaders gather in New York this week to tackle a host of crises: the violence Islamic State militants are wreaking in Iraq and Syria, the exponential spread of the deadly Ebola virus in Africa and deadlocked negotiations on Iran's nuclear program.

Islamic State expands influence to Egypt Islamic State, fighting to redraw the map of the Middle East, has been coaching Egypt's most dangerous militant group, complicating efforts to stabilize the biggest Arab nation.