LONDON: A second video has been released by Islamic State (IS) militants showing British journalist John Cantlie who is being held hostage.

The 5-minute, 55-second video is the second in less than a week. Cantlie is seen seated at a table wearing an orange jumpsuit — just like the uniforms worn by Muslim prisoners at American detention centres at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.He reads from a script, explaining how the United States' involvement in the Syrian conflict will mirror its misadventures in Vietnam.Cantlie begins by quoting a former Central Intelligence Agency officer Michael Scheuer whom he praises for his knowledge of the Middle East.He says in the video "In this programme, we'll see how the Western governments are hastily marching towards all-out war in Iraq and Syria without paying any heed to the lessons of the recent past. Not since Vietnam have we witnessed such a potential mess in the making".John Cantlie has been held by IS for almost two years.IS has already killed three hostages and, in its video showing the death of UK aid worker David Haines, threatened to kill British man Alan Henning next.Cantlie, 43 is a freelance photographer from Hazlemere in West Sussex.In a 3 minute 20 second clip posted on YouTube, Cantlie says that he reached Syria in November 2012 "where I was subsequently captured by the Islamic State. Now nearly two years later many things have changed including the expansion of the Islamic State to include large areas of eastern Syria and western Iraq. A landmass bigger than Britain and many other nations"."Now I know what you're thinking, you're thinking: 'He's only doing this because he's a prisoner. He's got a gun at his head and he's being forced to do this,' right? Well it's true I am a prisoner that I cannot deny but seeing as I've been abandoned by my government and my fate now lies in the hands of Islamic State I have nothing to lose. Maybe I will live and maybe I will die, but I want to take this opportunity to convey some facts that you can verify. Facts that if you contemplate might help preserving lives"."Over the next few programmes, I'm going to show you the truth as the western media tries to drag the public back to the abyss of another war with the Islamic State. After two disastrous and hugely unpopular wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, why is it that our governments appear so keen to get involved in yet another unwinnable conflict? I'm going to show you the truth behind these systems and motivation of the Islamic State, and how the western media, the very organisation I used to work for can twist and manipulate that truth to the public back home".It is the second time that Cantlie has found himself in the hands of militants in Syria. He was rescued from kidnappers in 2012, but four months later chose to return to the country, where he was abducted a second time and sold on to Isis.