LONDON: Britain which is bracing for its worst nightmare - a disintegration of the United Kingdom if Scotland votes to become independent - is all set for a long sleepless night.A new video was on Thursday released by Islamic State (IS) militants showing a British freelance photographer believed to be held hostage.The latest hostage is John Cantlie, held by ISIS for almost two years.ISIS has already killed three hostages and in its video showing the death of UK aid worker David Haines, threatened to kill British man Alan Henning next.The latest video shows a third British man wearing orange clothing who says he is a prisoner.No ISIS militants are seen in the video, which is called "Lend Me Your Ears" and is addressed to the western public.In the latest video Cantlie, 43, a freelance photographer from Hazlemere in West Sussex, explains that he used to work for some of the bigger newspapers and magazines in the UK.In a 3 minute 20 second clip posted on YouTube, Cantlie says that he reached Syria in November 2012 "where I was subsequently captured by the Islamic State. Now nearly two years later many things have changed including the expansion of the Islamic State to include large areas of eastern Syria and western Iraq. A landmass bigger than Britain and many other nations"."Now I know what you're thinking, you're thinking: 'He's only doing this because he's a prisoner. He's got a gun at his head and he's being forced to do this,' right? Well it's true I am a prisoner that I cannot deny but seeing as I've been abandoned by my government and my fate now lies in the hands of Islamic State I have nothing to lose. Maybe I will live and maybe I will die, but I want to take this opportunity to convey some facts that you can verify. Facts that if you contemplate might help preserving lives"."Over the next few programmes, I'm going to show you the truth as the western media tries to drag the public back to the abyss of another war with the Islamic State. After two disastrous and hugely unpopular wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, why is it that our governments appear so keen to get involved in yet another unwinnable conflict? I'm going to show you the truth behind these systems and motivation of the Islamic State, and how the western media, the very organisation I used to work for can twist and manipulate that truth to the public back home".He further states "There are two sides to every story - think you're getting the whole picture? And I'll show you the truth behind what happened when many European citizens were imprisoned and later released by the Islamic State and how the British and American governments thought they could do it differently to every other every other European country.They negotiated with the Islamic state and got their people home while the British and Americans were left behind. It's very alarming to see where this is all headed and it looks like history repeating itself yet again. There is time to change this seemingly inevitable sequence of events, but only if you, the public act now. Join me for the next few programmes and I think you may be surprised by what you learn".It is the second time that Cantlie has found himself in the hands of militants in Syria. He was rescued from kidnappers in 2012, but four months later chose to return to the country, where he was abducted a second time and sold to ISIS.