The Karnataka High Court  has   directed the State government to submit  details of applications received for registering the process of drilling bore wells by the officers designated for this purpose in every district.

State home department has made its presentation to the chief minister about various pending projects.

State home ministry wants to develop new training centres for cops.

States have been advised to allow free movement of fruits and vegetables by delisting them from the APMC Act. Vijay Karnataka, 15 years of trust, of truth, of winning, of excitement and of celebration.

Islamic State (IS) militants stoned to death two young men in Syria's eastern province of Deir al-Zour on charges of having "unlawful" sexual intercourse with other males, a monitoring group has reported.

Disturbed by the fragmentation in the Arab world, the UAE has said it is ready to cooperate with other nations to tackle the spread of Islamic State terrorist group that threatens the political systems in the region.

In an awareness drive to deter youths from being radicalized and recruited by terror outfits, the Kalyan police are using the example of the four local youths who are desperate to be rescued from the violent war being fought by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria and brought back home

Sleuths claim that they have information of calls from Kolkata to a suspected operative of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in a West Asian country in the last few weeks. The calls were allegedly made after the blast in Burdwan and the ISIS operative is said to have expressed his displeasure at the Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) module blowing its cover inthe state.

A 31-year-old Indian-origin Islamic State suspect, who is fighting in Syria, has posted a picture of him on Twitter posing with an AK-47 rifle and his new born baby.

France's defense minister says the country will send an additional six fighter jets to aid the battle against extremists from the Islamic State group.

The four Kalyan youths recruited by the Islamic State (ISIS) are said to have contacted their families, expressing a wish to be rescued and brought back home.

The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, group which controls a large swath of the two countries, (ISIS) has received between $35 million and $45 million in ransom payments in the past year, a UN expert monitoring sanctions against al-Qaida said on Monday.

Islamic Education Centre for Women will organise an Islamic conference on 'journey to eternity' at Town Hall here on February 25.

In a relief to Madhya Pradesh Higher Secondary Board of Education, Indore bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court on Monday dismissed a petition of student challenging result of board and request for revaluation.

​ Nearly 1,000 youths, winners of divisional level competitions representing youth organisations from across Karnataka are expected to participate in 17 competitions that includes bhavageethe, gigipada, lavani, kolatta, veeragase, dollukunitha, ranga geethe, folk dance and songs, sobane pada, and bhajans.

​ Vittal in Bantwal taluk of Dakshina Kannada district will host the state-level youth festival for three-days from December 6.

The two-day state level convention of All India Confederation of SC/ST Organisations will be held at Dr V M Godke Convention Centre, Old Airport Road, Bangalore from October 19.

Padma Prasad Hegde of Mangalore has been elected unopposed as president of Karnataka State Bar Council. Anil Kumar J M of Bangalore is the new vice-chairman.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi left for his tour of the State on the morning of Sunday at 9.10 am) after an overnight stay in Raj Bhavan, Mumbai.   He was seen off by Maharashtra Governor Ch Vidyasagar Rao. The Prime Minister arrived here from Aurangabad last night.

Father Muller Medical College is organising a two-day Karnataka State 10th Diabetes Conference under the aegis of Research Society for the Study of Diabetes in India, Karnataka chapter (RSSDI) at the hospital here from September 6.

A team from Lata Mangeshkar Hospital comprising Dr Chida Rajendaran, Dr Peeusha Wadhwani, Dr Saurabh Bagra was the winner and GMC Nagpur represented by Dr Radhika Dashputra, Dr. Almas Nazim and Dr. Karkera was the first runner up in 17th Late Dr Indrajit Mitra Memorial state-level surgical quiz organized by ASI Nagpur Chapter.

On the distaff side, Alva's College, Moodbidri won the team championship in the senior state powerlifting championship, while SDM Sports Club, Ujire was second.

Balanjaneya Gym, Mangalore emerged team champion in the men's section of the two-day senior state powerlifting championship that concluded at Town Hall here on August 17. Alva's College, Moodbidri finished second.