KOZHIKODE: Close to a century after violent convulsions gripped north Kerala in the name of a caliphate, descendants of Malabar's Mappila Rebellion leaders denounce the Islamic State gaining ground in west Asia.The revolt by Muslims (known in Kerala as Mappilas) was an off-shoot of the Khilafat movement called by Mahatma Gandhi to protest the disbanding of Turkey's Ottoman Caliphate. The Malabar uprising soon turned bloody and brought untold miseries upon the entire region, then part of Madras Presidency.Armed with hatchets and swords, they challenged the British army, only to be overpowered in a few months."A parallel government was established by the Mappilas after the British forces withdrew from the areas. The move to arrest Ali Musaliar on August 21 was an immediate con sequence of the revolt," said Musaliar's great grandson Anwar Ibrahim. Musaliar was led the Khilafat movement in Malabar.There was an attempt to create a "liberated area" in Malabar. The rebels destroyed police stations and government buildings. The rebellion was crushed by February 1922.The British seized seals of the Khilafat "government", passports issued by it, letters to the viceroy and the governor and press releases for newspapers.Around 10,000 Muslims were killed in four taluks of Malabar and an equal number was deported to places like the Andamans. There are many who believe the Khilafat movement was a misadventure."Caliphate for all Muslims was not practical in 1921. It is less so in 2014. Self-proclaimed caliph Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi's caliphate will be decimated in no time. There are a few groups among Kerala's Muslims who want to whip up passions by recalling memories of the Malabar rebellion. They have ulterior motives," said Zafar Pandikkad, author of a book on the local history of Pandikkad, epicentre of the rebellion during its last leg.Some feel the attempt to draw par allels between the Kerala uprising and the current Iraqi turmoil is misplaced. "Both Hindus and Muslims had taken part in the Khilafat movement in Malabar. Baghdadi's caliphate wants to decimate the Yazidis and Christians," said Anwar. The leaders of Kerala's Khilafat movement insisted on protecting Hindus, he pointed out."People like Brahmadathan Nambooridipad also had to suffer at the hands of British for participating in the movement." However, according to others, the Khilafat movement itself was a regressive idea. "Though the rebel leaders were against harassing Hindus and plundering their wealth, what happened was exactly the opposite," said M Gangadharan, who has studied the rebellion extensively.With the viciousness of west Asia's Islamic State evoking strong reactions world over, Malabar seems to have learnt lessons from its own century-old experience.Iraqi demonstrators call for an end to Islamic State ( ISIS) terrorism during a demonstration in front of the White House in Washington DC.