LONDON: The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) plans to seize Iran's nuclear weapons, unleash a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing and Nazi-style eugenics to consolidate and expand its self-declared "Islamic caliphate", according to a seized policy manifesto of the outfit.Fighters of the Sunni extremist group have captured vast swathes of territory in Iraq and Syria and their leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi has declared himself "caliph" of the "Islamic state". On Friday, the outfit released a video of the beheading of British aid worker Alan Henning — the fourth western hostage to be executed so far.In the manifesto believed to have been written by Abdullah Ahmed al-Meshedani, a member of ISIS's highly secretive six-man war cabinet, the outfit urged its members to plan for war with Iran. Typed on perforated sheets, the document was seized by Iraqi special forces during a raid in March at the house of one of the commanders of ISIS, The Sunday Times reported. Western security officials who examined the document believe it to be authentic and meant for senior members.ISIS aims to get hold of nuclear weapons with the help of Russia, to whom it would offer access to gas fields it controls in Iraq's Anbar province, the document says. Kremlin, it adds, will have to give up "Iran and its nuclear program and hand over its secrets". It would also have to abandon support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and back the Gulf states against Iran.Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has rejected a US offer to join the international coalition attacking the Sunni militants. However, Iran has said it will attack ISIS inside Iraq if they advance near the border. Iran is known as a close ally of the Shia-led government in Iraq.Meshedani, whose duties include managing suicide bombers, also calls for stripping Shia Iran of "all its power" and destroying the Shia ascendancy in Iraq. He also incites followers to kill Iraqi military chiefs, Shia officials and Iranian-backed militias fighting for the Iraqi government.The document contains 70 different plans, including ethnic cleansing and Nazi-style genetic experiments to consolidate and expand the Islamic caliphate. It also calls for stepping up intelligence gathering operations, some of which are aimed at its own men. Meshedani writes that the group's intelligence operatives will "eliminate" its own members if they deviate from its "desired goal". He further warns, "The leadership of the political wing must know that it is being watched and listened to by the intelligence apparatus which passes on everything."Meshedani also suggests buying islands from Yemen and the Comoros, in the Indian Ocean, "to establish a military base on the flank of the Arab lands".A security source familiar with the document told the paper, "Nothing shocks western governments these days in relation to ISIS and its fanatical aspirations. And we've known and feared for some time that they want to obtain chemical and nuclear weapons."