Caliph Ibrahim, the leader of the Islamic State, appeared to come out of nowhere when he matter-of-factly proclaimed himself the ruler of all Muslims in the middle of an otherwise typical Ramadan sermon.

The Islamic State plot to carry out random beheadings in Sydney alleged by police is a simple and barbaric scheme that has shaken Australians. But terrorism experts on Friday questioned whether the ruthless movement had the capacity or inclination to

The five SIMI fugitives wanted for Bijnor blast operated on al-Qaida pattern.

The Centre today sounded a countrywide alert after an al-Qaida video appeared in which the terror outfit threatened to carry out campaign in India.

Al-Qaida, which has announced the creation of a separate wing for India, wants to portray Prime Minister Narendra Modi as an enemy of Islam, a US expert said.

Libya's Prime Minister Abdullah al-Thinni and his cabinet took the oath of office on Sunday after lawmakers approved the lineup, but will struggle to rule a country where a rival parliament sits in the capital Tripoli.

According to the police, Zahid Ali Hindi advised the two Maharashtra youths to first reach Iraq on a visiting visa before reaching Afghanistan.

Iraqi pilots who have joined Islamic State in Syria are training members of the group to fly in three captured fighter jets, a group monitoring the war said on Friday, saying it was the first time the militant group had taken to the air.

After al Qaeda's announcement of formation of an Indian wing, an organisation of Shia Muslims here has announced a reward of Rs one crore each for the killing of the chiefs of ISIS, al-Qaeda, Jamaat-u-Dawa, Taliban and Harkat-ul-Mujahideen.

"At the meeting of our all India executive on September 6, we discussed the matter of putting reward on killing of these five persons heading five organsations involved in terrorism. The resolution was unaniously passed. We will give the reward to those who kill them," Secretary General of All India Shia Hussaini Fund Syed Hasan Mehdi said.

Al Hilal Bank, one the fastest-growing banks in the UAE, has implemented the Infosys Finacle e-banking solution.  The new solution enables Al Hilal to provide a full range of internet banking services to its corporate customers in an intelligent and seamless manner, without compromising security.

Senior IPS officer AL Banerjee has been appointed as the new Director General of Police (DGP) Uttar Pradesh on Friday afternoon.

Attackers Sports Club, Chokkabettu is organising state level T20 cricket tournament for the Al Muzain Trophy at Nehru Maidan here from April 10 to 30.

Islamic Education Centre for Women will organise an Islamic conference on 'journey to eternity' at Town Hall here on February 25.