Former world champion Sebastian Vettel drove a Ferrari for the first time since moving from Red Bull.

The committees formed by the Pakistan government and the banned Taliban for peace talks will meet for the first time on Tuesday even as cricketer- turned-politician Imran Khan and the right-wing Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-F distanced themselves from the peace process.

Lewis Hamilton was the fastest driver in the final practice at the Formula One Canadian Grand Prix in Montreal.

Marussia's point-scoring Monaco GP could put it on course for a $30 million F1 prize money boost at the end of this season.

Pimpri Chinchwad municipal commissioner Rajeev Jadhav  will be conducting the special cleanliness drive tomorrow in Zone F at 7 am. Want to be a Journalist? Come to Times School of Journalism. Visit tcms.in

Four-time world champion Sebastian Vettel slammed the new sound of Formula One Thursday and said this season's quiet, hybrid engines desperately needed a makeover to bring back some excitement.

The newly launched Goa Democratic Front (GDF) will hold its first meeting at Lohia Maiden, Margao on Saturday to kick of election campaign for the Lok Shaba election.

NCP corporator Poornima Sonavane has been elected as president of Zone F of Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation(PCMC) today.

Ferrari's Kimi Raikkonen was fastest as Lewis Hamilton crashed his Mercedes on an otherwise quiet opening day to Formula One's pre-season testing in Jerez, southern Spain on Tuesday.

Japan's Kamui Kobayashi and Swedish rookie Marcus Ericsson will form an all-new driver line-up at Malaysian-owned Caterham this season, the Formula One tail-enders said on Tuesday.

Islamic Education Centre for Women will organise an Islamic conference on 'journey to eternity' at Town Hall here on February 25.

Halburga    hobli in Bidar taluk of Bidar district recorded lowest minimum temperature of 7°C at 6.30pm on November 29.

​Karwar hobli in Karwar taluk of Uttara Kannada district recorded maximum temperature of 38°C on November 28 at 1pm.

Uppinangady hobli in Puttur taluk of Dakshina Kannada district recorded maximum temperature of 39.5°C on November 27 at 1pm.