Al-Qaida wants to portray Modi as enemy of Islam: US analyst Al-Qaida, which has announced the creation of a separate wing for India, wants to portray Prime Minister Narendra Modi as an enemy of Islam, a US expert said.

America forms 'core coalition' to fight Islamic State Obama sought to use a Nato summit to enlist allied support in a campaign to destroy Islamist militants but it remained unclear how nations might join Washington in air strikes.

Australia contributing planes for anti-Islamic State campaign The 400 air force personnel and 200 others in the contingent could be deployed this week, PM Abbott told reporters in Darwin.

Iraqi army woos deserters back to war on Islamic State The Iraqi military command has launched a campaign to re-enlist soldiers and officers who abandoned their units, a crucial step in its effort to rebuild an army that has been routed in battle after battle by Islamic State jihadists.

Islamic State group visits Pakistan militants: Jundullah spokesman A spokesman for a small Pakistani militant group claims that a delegation from the Islamic State group has visited Jundallah's leaders in southwestern Pakistan.

After Syria and Iraq, Islamic State makes inroads in India and Pakistan Islamist militants of various hues already hold sway across restive and impoverished areas of South Asia, but IS is starting to attract younger radicals in the region.

France joins US against Islamic State over Iraq France is back at America's side in conducting military strikes in Iraq.

Lucknow youth group holds Islamic aptitude test and quiz A group of volunteers in old city area have developed an aptitude test to judge a person's understanding of Islamic teachings and Quranic preaching.

Pakistani Taliban declare allegiance to Islamic State and global jihad The Pakistani Taliban declared allegiance to Islamic State today and ordered militants across the region to help the Middle Eastern jihadist group in its campaign to set up a global Islamic caliphate.

ISIS trying to expand its influence in Pakistan, distributes pamphlets ISIS introduced itself as Daulat-e-Islamia in the pamphlet and made an appeal to the local population for supporting its jihad for the establishment of Islamic caliphate.