MUMBAI: The state anti-terrorism squad (ATS), probing the mysterious disappearance of four Kalyan youths, on Monday grilled five persons who are suspected to have indoctrinated and motivated the boys for extreme activities. In the last one week, the ATS questioned at least seven persons.Four Kalyan residents, Arif Majeed, Shaeen Tanki, Fahad Sheikh and Aman Tandel, all in their early 20s, went to pilgrimage in Iraq in May this year and disappeared. Later, it transpired that the youth had allegedly joined the militant outfit, ISIS. Parents of the missing boys complained to the ATS and demanded that those responsible for their children's brainwash should be brought to book. "Five people including a property dealer from Navi Mumbai, a 25-year-old commerce graduate, a 55-year-old businessman and two others are being grilled in this connection," said a senior ATS officer. Earlier, the police had questioned seven persons but could not get any fruitful information from them and allowed them to walk free.On August 28, Tanki called up his family and informed that Majeed had been killing in Mosul, Iraq in a bombing. "We are questioning people but our report is still inconclusive. All those being questioned have never travelled to Iraq nor they had any connection with any banned outfit I the past. They are from Thane district, Navi Mumbai and Kalyan. We don't want to disclose much about them since nothing has been established against them yet," he added.Majeed, an engineering student, travelled to Iraq on May 23 with Fahad, Tandel and Tanki to 'pilgrimage to the country's religious shrines', but never returned. They were suspected to have joined the insurgents of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). Before setting off, Majeed left a letter at home saying "fighting has been enjoined upon you". In it, he censured members of his family, saying he had "cried" when he saw them "sinning", "living luxurious lives", "watching television and "not praying".The cops are scanning the SMSes and call data records of the suspects during the inquiry.