The Union home ministry is actively considering the National Investigation Agency's proposal to register a case against Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) to check the threat posed by it after intelligence inputs said nearly 20 Indian youth may have joined the global outfit.

An airstrike by a US-led coalition hit a gathering of leaders of the Islamic State jihadist group in northwestern Iraq on Saturday, and Iraqi officials said they believed that a number of top militants had been killed.

Two Iraqi officials and state television say an airstrike in western Iraq wounded the leader of the Islamic State group, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. Pentagon officials said they had no information on such a strike or al-Baghdadi being wounded.

A Pentagon spokesman says a US airstrike on a 10-vehicle convoy in northern Iraq last week was targeting Islamic State "battlefield leaders," but not senior leaders like Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the group's most senior leader.

The ISIS released an audio recording it said was of its chief Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. Series of air strikes on jihadist leaders sparked rumours he had been killed.

The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) plans to seize Iran’s nuclear weapons, unleash a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing and Nazi-style eugenics to consolidate and expand its self-declared “Islamic caliphate”, according to a seized policy manifesto of the outfit.

Turkey's president said Kobani was "about to fall" after Islamic State fighters advanced into the south west of the Syrian Kurdish town, pressing home a three-week assault has cost a reported 400 lives.

A man of Indian origin and former Guantanamo Bay detainee has revealed that he knew who had kidnapped British hostage Alan Henning and also offered to intervene and help free the aid worker from Isis militants.

The prosecution in the 26/11 Mumbai attacks case submitted the draft charges against suspected Laskhar-e-Taiba (LeT) operative Zabihuddin Ansari alias Abu Jundal.

After al Qaeda's announcement of formation of an Indian wing, an organisation of Shia Muslims here has announced a reward of Rs one crore each for the killing of the chiefs of ISIS, al-Qaeda, Jamaat-u-Dawa, Taliban and Harkat-ul-Mujahideen.

"At the meeting of our all India executive on September 6, we discussed the matter of putting reward on killing of these five persons heading five organsations involved in terrorism. The resolution was unaniously passed. We will give the reward to those who kill them," Secretary General of All India Shia Hussaini Fund Syed Hasan Mehdi said.

Al Hilal Bank, one the fastest-growing banks in the UAE, has implemented the Infosys Finacle e-banking solution.  The new solution enables Al Hilal to provide a full range of internet banking services to its corporate customers in an intelligent and seamless manner, without compromising security.

Senior IPS officer AL Banerjee has been appointed as the new Director General of Police (DGP) Uttar Pradesh on Friday afternoon.

Attackers Sports Club, Chokkabettu is organising state level T20 cricket tournament for the Al Muzain Trophy at Nehru Maidan here from April 10 to 30.