LONDON: The Islamic State has released a video showing the beheading of British hostage David Haines.The brutal murder comes just a day after the aid worker's family issued a public plea for his captors to contact them.UK is trying to verify the authenticity of the video. British prime minister David Cameron has termed the beheading "act of pure evil" and vowed "to do everything possible to find the killers".The 44-year-old aid worker was seized in Syria in 2013.He was being held by Islamic State militants who have already killed two US captives. The latest video also includes a threat to kill a second British hostage.In the video, entitled "A Message to the Allies of America", a masked man is shown carrying out the beheading of 44-year-old Haines.David CameronHaines is the third western hostage and the first Briton to be killed by the Islamic State.Denouncing the killing, Cameron said "This is a despicable and appalling murder of an innocent aid worker. It is an act of pure evil. My heart goes out to the family of David Haines who have shown extraordinary courage and fortitude throughout this ordeal. We will do everything in our power to hunt down these murderers and ensure they face justice, however long it takes".US president, Barack Obama too has condemned the killing."The United States strongly condemns the barbaric murder of UK citizen David Haines by the terrorist group ISIL. US stands shoulder to shoulder tonight with our close friend and ally in grief and resolve. We will work with the UK and a broad coalition of nations from the region and around the world to bring the perpetrators of this outrageous act to justice, and to degrade and destroy this threat to the people of our countries, the region and the world".Interestingly, in the video, the killer directly addresses Cameron, saying that Haines "has to pay the price for your promise" to arm Kurdish peshmerga fighters against ISIS.Haines addresses Cameron, saying: "You entered voluntarily into a coalition with the United States against the Islamic State, just as your predecessor Tony Blair did, following a trend amongst our British prime ministers who can't find the courage to say no to the Americans. Unfortunately, it is we, the British public, that will in the end pay the price for our Parliament's selfish decisions".The video then shows the killer — dressed in all black and face covered making a statement.He says "This British man has to pay the price for your promise, Cameron, to arm the Peshmerga against the Islamic State. Ironically, he has spent a decade of his life serving under the same Royal Air Force that is responsible for delivering those arms. Your evil alliance with America which continues to strike the Muslims of Iraq and most recently bombed the Haditha Dam will only accelerate your destruction. And playing the role of the obedient lapdog, Cameron, will only drag you and your people into another bloody and unwinnable war".Cameron on Sunday will host a meeting of the British government's emergency committee, Cobra.Labour leader Ed Miliband said he was "sickened at the disgusting, barbaric killing" of Haines.Mike Haines, the brother of David Haines said on Sunday after hearing of his brother's murder "I am brother to David Haines, who was recently murdered in cold blood. David was like so very many of us, just another bloke. Born in 1970 to parents who loved us both, our childhood was centred around our family. Holidays in caravans and tents, days away as a family which we remember fondly. David and I were brought up to know right from wrong, although we might not with the innocence of youth have always chosen right. David was a good brother, there when I needed him and absent when I didn't. I hope that he felt the same way about me. He was, in the right mood, the life and soul of the party and on other times the most stubborn irritating pain in the ass"."After leaving school he worked with the Royal Mail before joining the RAF as an aircraft engineer. He married his childhood sweetheart Louise and in the due process of time had a wee lass Bethany. He was — and no doubt wherever he is — exceptionally proud of Bethany. David served with the UN in the Balkans, helping people in real need. There are many accolades from people in that region that David helped. He helped whoever needed help, regardless of race, creed or religion. During this time David began to decide that humanitarian work was the field he wanted to work in"."David left the RAF and was employed by Scotrail. As with every job, David entered into it with enthusiasm. David met and married his second wife Dragana and they have a four-year-old daughter Athea. David was most alive and enthusiastic in his humanitarian roles. His joy and anticipation for the work he went to do in Syria is for myself and family the most important element of this whole sad affair. He was and is loved by all his family and will be missed terribly".