NEW DELHI: A group led by Shia leaders gathered at Jantar Mantar on Wednesday evening to protest against terror strikes and mass killings in Iraq by members of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria outfit. A registration drive was also launched for people, especially youth, to become a razakar (volunteer) and go to Iraq to join the fight against these terrorists.A candlelight march was also organized by Anjuman-e-Haideri which conducted the registration drive. ISIS has perpetrated mass killings in the cities of Iraq which has worried governments across the world.The religious leaders condemned the killings and violence in the name of religion. They also appealed to youth to get ready to make the supreme sacrifice in service of God and country. "The atrocities meted out by the terrorists to the people of Iraq are a crime against humanity. People from India are also there and even they are facing threat to life. We are committed to help them at any cost. Forty of our brothers have been kidnapped by the terrorists. This drive is to save the humanity and we will not give up at any cost," Mohammad Bakir Zaidi said.The registration drive will be carried on till June 25 and the lists of volunteers along with a photocopy of their passports will be submitted to the embassy of Iraq on June 26, Taqi Abbas, member of Anjuman-E-Haideri, said. More than 1,000 volunteers registered themselves on Wednesday, he said.Protesters raised slogans against terrorism. They also carried placards which read 'Terrorism Murdabad' and 'Razakars To Save Holy Shrine in Iraq'. Ali Mehndi, a resident of Jahangirpuri who registered himself as a razakar, said he will fight for the shrine and the people.Religious leaders also urged people to come together and save the holy shrine of Karbala from the clutches of terrorism. Most of them blamed both US and Saudi Arabia for terrorism across the world. "America nurtured the Taliban for its own benefits. Saudi Arabia should also take the blame for funding the terrorist organizations," said Maulana Munnawar Abbas who came to join the protests from Meerut.Those who joined the march condemned the terror strikes. "I condemn the terrorist activities in the name of Islam. I have come to support the humanity against terrorism," Wafia Abbas, a doctor from Varanasi, said.