What is happening in the self-declared Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) is a repeat of what happened in Afghanistan following the invasion of the country in 1979, by the then Soviet Union.

The families of three youths from Kalyan, who had reportedly joined militant group Islamic State of Iraq and Syria in Raqqa, said they are getting increasingly worried as they have not received a single phone call from any of the three youths over the two months.

The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, group which controls a large swath of the two countries, (ISIS) has received between $35 million and $45 million in ransom payments in the past year, a UN expert monitoring sanctions against al-Qaida said on Monday.

In an awareness drive to deter youths from being radicalized and recruited by terror outfits, the Kalyan police are using the example of the four local youths who are desperate to be rescued from the violent war being fought by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria and brought back home

Sleuths claim that they have information of calls from Kolkata to a suspected operative of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in a West Asian country in the last few weeks. The calls were allegedly made after the blast in Burdwan and the ISIS operative is said to have expressed his displeasure at the Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) module blowing its cover inthe state.

The Union home ministry is actively considering the National Investigation Agency's proposal to register a case against Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) to check the threat posed by it after intelligence inputs said nearly 20 Indian youth may have joined the global outfit.

The home ministry is actively considering NIA’s proposal to register a case against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) to check the threat posed by it after intelligence inputs said nearly 20 Indian youths may have joined the global outfit.

Security agencies are on their toes following a warning from National Security Guards (NSG) director general J N Chaudhary about possible attack on Indian cities jointly by Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and Al-Qaida outfits.

Gurpinder Kuar whose brother is also one among abducted Indians said all the relatives of abducted persons were too much worried about well being of their relatives especially after US air strikes .

government has failed to even get anyone of the abducted person talk to his relatives in India, Parwinder.

What option are we left except to come on roads, questions Parwinder Singh whose brother and two brother in laws's are among the abducted Indians in Iraq.

They were raising slogans against Centre government for its alleged inability to rescue or even trace the whereabouts of their dear ones.

The relatives of as many as seven Indians out of a total of around forty who were kidnapped by Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in the second week of June had arrived here from different places to attract government attention.

Holding black flags in their hands, the relatives of Indians abducted in Mosul city of Iraq took out a march on Mall Road on Friday evening.

we will sit on dharna till the time government shows us proof of well being of our boys, parwinder singh, whose brother and two brother in law are abducted in iraq.

shamsher was on way to india from iraq but fell ill and was admitted in a hospital in sharjah where he had died on july8th.

Body of Shamsher Singh who had died in Dubai on way to iraq reached his native village in Gurdaspur district.

After safe return from Iraq now unemployment and mounting debts stare at the youths. The youths and their families are now demanding that state government should come forward to help them to come out of the predicament. The youths had gathered at the NRI Sabha office here on Wenesday.