LONDON: British taxi driver Alan Henning, who skipped Christmas with his family to raise funds to purchase ambulances and medical equipment and join an aid convoy to Syria, has been beheaded by Islamic State militants.Henning (47) from Eccles, Greater Manchester had been held captive in Syria for nine months by IS militants.Despite repeated requests from his wife who said that Henning "was working with Muslims to help the most vulnerable within Syria" IS on Friday night released a video showing Henning's beheading, making him the fourth western hostage and the second Briton to have been killed.The others who were beheaded on video were US journalists James Foley and Steven Sotloff and Scottish aid worker David Haines.In the video Henning says: "I am Alan Henning. Because of our parliament's decision to attack the Islamic State, I as a member of the British public will now pay the price for that decision".In the video, titled "Another Message to America and its allies," a masked man standing behind Henning, who is seen kneeling in front, says "The blood of David Haines was on your hands David Cameron. Alan Henning will also be slaughtered but his blood is on the hands of British parliament."This handout image received from Britain's foreign and Commonwealth office on September 15, 2014 shows British aid worker Alan Henning holding a child in a refugee camp on the Turkish-Syrian border. (AFP photo)​British prime minister David Cameron said the brutal murder shows how barbaric and repulsive "these terrorists are".Cameron said "My thoughts and prayers tonight are with Alan's wife Barbara, their children and all those who loved him. Alan had gone to Syria to help get aid to people of all faiths in their hour of need. The fact that he was taken hostage when trying to help others and now murdered demonstrates that there are no limits to the depravity of these IS terrorists. We will do all we can to hunt down these murderers and bring them to justice".The UK foreign office said in a statement "We are aware of the video and are working urgently to verify the contents. If true, this is a further disgusting murder. We are offering the family every support possible; they ask to be left alone at this time". The video also shows the jihadist then parading American hostage Peter Kassig. He says, "Obama, you have started your aerial bombardment in Syria which keeps on striking our people. So it's only right we continue to strike the necks of your people".This undated photo provided by Kassig Family shows Peter Kassig standing in front of a truck filled with supplies for Syrian refugees. A video purportedly produced by militants in Syria released on Friday October 3, 2014, shows Kassig, of Indianapolis, kneeling on the ground as a masked militant says he will be killed next. (AP photo/Courtesy Kassig family)Earlier this week, the wife of Alan Henning received an audio file from her husband pleading for his life.The British aid worker was kidnapped last December while in Syria.Barbara Henning sent out a plea to his captors to release him. In the statement, Barbara Henning said her husband had been to a Sharia court and cleared of "being a spy and declared to be no threat"."I implore Islamic State to abide by the decisions of their own justice system," she added.She said "He was working with Muslims to help the most vulnerable within Syria. We are at a loss why those leading Islamic State cannot open their hearts and minds to the facts surrounding Alan's imprisonment and why they continue to threaten his life."She completed her message "Please release Alan".She added "His purpose for being there was an act of sheer compassion. I cannot see how it could assist any State's cause to allow the world to see a man like Alan dying".Over 100 of Britain's most influential British leaders and religious heads recently made an unprecedented joint appeal to Alan's kidnappers to release him unharmed or commit the "worst condemnable sin" against Islam.A masked man stands next to a kneeling man identified as US citizen Peter Edward Kassig (L), in this still image taken from video released by Islamic State militants fighting in Iraq and Syria on October 3, 2014. (Reuters photo)The request signed by dozens of Imams from across the UK said "In Islam, concern for fellow humans and the duty to help everyone is a religious obligation""Anyone undertaking a humanitarian act is paving his or her way to receive help from heaven," the letter said adding, "In contrast, the senseless kidnapping and despicable threats to Henning cannot be justified anywhere in the Quran and the Sunnah (Prophetic traditions)"."The un-Islamic fanatics are not acting as Muslims. They are perpetrating the worst crimes against humanity. This is not Jihad — it is a war against all humanity. The Holy Quran says that 'Whosoever kills a human being, it is as if killing the entire human race; and whosoever saves a life, saves the entire human race'"."We plead with those holding Alan Henning to see the errors of their ways, to embrace the word of the Quran and accept that what they are now doing constitutes the worst condemnable sin".