Three youths threaten to jump from a five-storied building in Statue in a protest against delay in appointment to India Reserve Battalion commando.

Police and Fire Force trying to pacify the youths who are threatening to commit suicide at a building opposite Secretariat

Argentine President Cristina Fernandez said during a trip to the Vatican on Saturday she had received threats by the Islamic State due to her friendship with compatriot Pope Francis and for recognizing both Israel and Palestine.

Madras high court asks as to why contempt proceedings should not be initiated against Chennai corporation commissioner for failure to implement its order shifting iron traders and workshops From Mint on Broadway to Sathangadu near Manali.

BJP spokesperson V V Rajesh has received a postcard apparently from SDPI Mannar Unit, which contains a threat that PM Narendra Modi will be beheaded if he dared to enter Kerala.

The state government is focused on the potential threat posed by Ebola virus and will ensure that it doesn't adversely impact Dasara festival, health minister U T Khader has said.    Pointing out that visitors from overseas and from various parts of India check into the city during the Dasara season, he said the government is aware of the threat but is constantly monitoring the situation

Health Minister U T Khader on said that screening facilities have been set up at international airports at Bangalore and Mangalore to screen international passengers coming to India about symptoms of Ebola, the dreaded disease .

Tension gripped Muthialpet region after a primary health centre received a bomb threat. An unidentified person called the centre and warned that a bomb will explode in 30 minutes. Panic-stricken staff members cleared the centre and alerted police. A police team along with a bomb detection squad rushed to the centre and made an elaborate search. A sniffer dog was also pressed into service. The squad members after thorough screening declared that the threat a hoax.

Sapna Pareira (48), who serially climbs atop buildings and hoardings and threatens to jump, was at it again on Friday evening. This time the Vile Parle resident climbed a tree at the bus depot next to the VT station. Officials from the fire brigade and MRA Marg police station finally managed to bring Pareira down after two hours.

Barely eight hours before the elections in the Srirampur constituency in Hooghly, Diti Chatterjee, Trinamool Congress councillor, Ward 19 of the Uttarpara Kotrung Municipality warned shopowners that she would bring down their establishments.

Telangana minister D Sridhar Babu firm on quitting the Kiran Cabinet in protest at chief minister N Kiran Kumar Reddy stripping him of the legislative affairs charge.

The rumor of terror threat to Lal Bahadur Shastri International Airport, Babatpur gripped the city on Monday. However, the security in-charge of the airport denied any such threat. The police were also unaware about and threat.

According to highly placed sources at SIB, the Communist Party of India, Maoist (CPI, M) chief Ganpathy held a meeting last month in the forests of Abujhmad and Maoists in large number had crossed borders of Nepal, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand and Odisha to reach Bastar.