The Union home ministry is actively considering the National Investigation Agency's proposal to register a case against Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) to check the threat posed by it after intelligence inputs said nearly 20 Indian youth may have joined the global outfit.

The home ministry is actively considering NIA’s proposal to register a case against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) to check the threat posed by it after intelligence inputs said nearly 20 Indian youths may have joined the global outfit.

Security agencies are on their toes following a warning from National Security Guards (NSG) director general J N Chaudhary about possible attack on Indian cities jointly by Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and Al-Qaida outfits.

What is happening in the self-declared Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) is a repeat of what happened in Afghanistan following the invasion of the country in 1979, by the then Soviet Union.

Sleuths claim that they have information of calls from Kolkata to a suspected operative of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in a West Asian country in the last few weeks. The calls were allegedly made after the blast in Burdwan and the ISIS operative is said to have expressed his displeasure at the Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) module blowing its cover inthe state.

Twenty-seven Punjabis among 39 Indians abducted by Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) are said to be working in a textile factory in Mosul.

The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) terrorist group intends to seize Tehran’s nuclear secrets and use it against the country.

The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) plans to seize Iran’s nuclear weapons, unleash a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing and Nazi-style eugenics to consolidate and expand its self-declared “Islamic caliphate”, according to a seized policy manifesto of the outfit.

Opposition leader V S Achuthanandan criticised the way the ISIS soldiers in Iraq are being termed as terrorists. ``They are fighters for their country. They are not terrorists. The nurses who have returned from Iraq themselves had said that these fighters had behaved well with them. They took care of the sisters with utmost respect and they protected them for ensuring their safe return to India,'' said the opposition leader.

Gujarat high court has granted bail to Hyderabad cleric Mohammed Abdul Qavi, who was arrested in connection with the 2003 ISI conspiracy case in April this year. Your 2 hours a day, thrice a week for 100 days can change many lives. Apply now to volunteer with Teach India at www.teachindia.net for Delhi/NCR & Mumbai region only.

Gurpinder Kuar whose brother is also one among abducted Indians said all the relatives of abducted persons were too much worried about well being of their relatives especially after US air strikes .

government has failed to even get anyone of the abducted person talk to his relatives in India, Parwinder.

What option are we left except to come on roads, questions Parwinder Singh whose brother and two brother in laws's are among the abducted Indians in Iraq.

They were raising slogans against Centre government for its alleged inability to rescue or even trace the whereabouts of their dear ones.

The relatives of as many as seven Indians out of a total of around forty who were kidnapped by Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in the second week of June had arrived here from different places to attract government attention.

Holding black flags in their hands, the relatives of Indians abducted in Mosul city of Iraq took out a march on Mall Road on Friday evening.

we will sit on dharna till the time government shows us proof of well being of our boys, parwinder singh, whose brother and two brother in law are abducted in iraq.

shamsher was on way to india from iraq but fell ill and was admitted in a hospital in sharjah where he had died on july8th.