Ramkrishna Math is organizing an inter-school group singing competition as a part of birth anniversary celebrations of Swami Vivekananda at Ramkrishna Math, Dhantoli from December 5. Preliminary rounds will be held from 9.45am to 12.30pm from December 5 to 8 and final round will be held from 9.45am to 1.30pm on December 11. Last date for registration is November 29. Information can be had between 5pm and 8pm or contact on 2423422.

S forces took advantage of the airstrikes against the Islamic State extremist group in Syria to try to simultaneously wipe out the leadership of an unrelated cell of veterans of al-Qaida.

The Danish government says it is joining the coalition to strike at the Islamic State extremist group, sending seven F-16 fighter jets to take part in airstrikes against the group in Iraq.

UK PM David Cameron says the slaying of a British hostage in Syria demonstrates the necessity of destroying the Islamic State extremist group.

Just over a year ago, Afshin Kobani was a teacher. Now, the Kurdish Syrian woman has traded the classroom for the front lines in the battle for Kobani, a town besieged by fighters from the Islamic State extremist group.

Andhra Pradesh Government issued orders to provide a financial assistance of Rs.5 lakhs to the families of civilians who are killed in extremist violence, if there is no eligible family member in the family to provide compassionate appointment.

The Mahindra Group today announced a donation of Rs. 2 crore to the Prime Ministers National Relief Fund to aid in ongoing disaster relief operations in the state of Jammu and Kashmir. Your 2 hours a day, thrice a week for 100 days can change many lives. Apply now to volunteer with Teach India at www.teachindia.net for Delhi/NCR & Mumbai region only.

A group of 15-20 investors lodged protest against a jewelry shop, also running an investment fund, at Rani Jhansi road for not returning their money here on Monday afternoon.

KPCC president V M Sudheeran has banned any group meetings within the party in the wake of the party revamp in the booth, block and mandalam committees. In a letter written to all the district congress committees, the KPCC president has urged to take strict action against those who are convening or attending the group meetings.

ASK Group , a diversified financial services group, has announced its maiden investment from its offshore fund in ATS Group project in Noida. The total investment is of Rs.127 crores.

Ian El-Mokadem, Chief Executive Officer of Exova Group plc, said : "This (Metallurgical Services) is our sixth acquisition within the past year and underlines our strategy of growing our global footprint and extending our services through strategic acquisitions in the customer sectors we serve from our facilities in 23 countries worldwide." Founded in 1964, Metallurgical Services employs 130 specialists who support over 3,500 customers mainly throughout the western region.  The company will now operate under the Exova Metallurgical Services brand.

Hicham Abdallah, MD for Exova in Middle East and Asia Pacific, said: "As an emerging market, the Indian subcontinent is forecasting significant industrial growth.  Metallurgical Services has established an enviable market reputation which, combined with Exova's technical capabilities and operational infrastructure, means we are well placed to capitalise on this growth.

Exova Group plc has acquired Mumbai-based Metallurgical Services Private Limited.The move will extend the Exova's geographical reach into India and support the expansion of its offering to customers in emerging Asian markets. Metallurgical Services has a market-leading position in the provision of specialist metallurgical testing to customers in high growth sectors including oil & gas, industrials and infrastructure in India. Its customers will now get  access to Exova's services including corrosion, coatings and Engineering Critical Assessment.

Brigade Group, one of India's leading real estate developers has announced the launch of Wisteria, a new phase of luxury apartments at Brigade Meadows, Kanakapura Road, next to the Art of Living campus, in Bangalore. Wisteria consists of primarily 2 and 3 bedroom luxury apartments. The 2 bedroom luxury apartments range between 1120 - 1300 sft and the 3 bedroom luxury apartments range between 1430 - 1630 sft. The 1 bedroom luxury apartments range between 680 - 900 sft.