LGBT people have equal right to be elected to public office | The ...Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people have always been a marginalized group in the so-called democratic Indonesia. They often face discrimination in the form of discriminative regulations, such as the law that still forbids same-sex marriage, and structured violence conducted both by civil society groups and the state. As the 2014 elections draw ever closer, The Jakarta Post’s Hans David Tampubolon spoke with Yuli Rustinawati, chairperson of LGBT rights watchdog Arus Pelangi, to discuss the concerns and hopes of LGBT people vis-à-vis the new administration and leadership.



Question: What is the most crucial thing the new government should do to serve the interests of LGBT people? 



Answer: We expect the new government to annul all policies and regulations that discriminate against the LGBT community, both at the national and regional level. In some regions, LGBT people are criminalized through official regulations, such as one that classifies LGBT members as prostitutes. The new government should also formulate new policies and regulations, which are based on universal human rights values, to ensure the LGBT community receives the same rights as any other Indonesian citizen. In a sense, we need the new government to fully harmonize all regulations concerning LGBT rights so that the issue surrounding our sexual preferences and expression can become a mainstream issue in the public arena.



Among all the election candidates and party platforms, do you see any party as having an agenda to raise the LGBT rights issue? 



So far, I have not seen any political party that has a strong commitment to including this issue in their campaign. One party does, however, share a similar vision and mission to our own regarding the recognition of human rights, and that party is the Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle [PDI-P]. The PDI-P’s politicians and members are also the most active in communicating with the LGBT community to discuss its concerns and hopes.



Has the LGBT community groomed a figure to enter the country’s political arena? 



We would love to be able to prepare someone from our ranks to represent our concerns through official political channels, by running for a seat in the House of Representatives with the support of a political party. However, recent experience has shown that grooming an LGBT figure to run for public office is easier said than done due to the massive conservatism and stereotyping in Indonesian society.



For example, a transsexual recently applied to become a commissioner with the National Commission on Human Rights [Komnas HAM], and yet he was ridiculed and mocked by House legislators during the final “fit and proper” test.



The legislators seemed to be more concern with his sexual preference rather than his ability and professionalism in the field of human rights. They judged him immediately, and assumed he had no morality because he was a transsexual. I am not sure that now would be a good time for any LGBT person to run for public office, and to honestly express their sexual identity given the current stereotyping of LGBT members.



Some LGBT people have run for office but only by keeping their sexuality a secret. We do hope, though, that there will soon come a time when members of the LGBT community will be able to enjoy the same right as everyone else to be elected into public office, and not having to worry about public opinion regarding their sexual choices. 



How significant is the country’s LGBT community to a political party? 



I cannot give a definitive figure as to what percentage the LGBT community could contribute to a political party’s electoral votes. However, political parties must understand that LGBT members in Indonesia are legitimate citizens with voting rights. I have heard from LGBT campaigners in the regions that several legislative candidates from different parties have begun approaching them for discussions.



With this in mind, I believe that the LGBT community is quite a significant force in terms of votes; if the opposite was true, why would those legislative candidates try to talk with us? What LGBT activists need to remember is to urge legislative candidates to make equal rights for LGBT members one of their main campaign points if they want to 

garner our votes.



Why doesn’t the LGBT community establish its own political party to raise this issue? 



That is our ultimate dream, but it is too difficult right now. Within the next 30, 50 or 100 years we may see the first political party for LGBT people. What is important now is to raise the issue regarding our rights so that the state and the wider public acknowledge us as human beings whose basic rights and needs must be guaranteed. 

Some figures have already been nominated for the presidency. 



Do you have any hope in any of them? 



I believe Jokowi [Jakarta Governor Joko Widodo and presidential candidate for the PDI-P] offers more hope than the others. Jokowi is the first fresh new face to appear on the political scene in the last decade. At the same time, the PDI-P shares our view regarding the importance of human rights for all. The party also led by example, when its chairwoman, Megawati Soekarnoputri, chatted with transsexuals during the May Day celebrations. This is something that other party leaders have never done.