Argentine Senate considers same-sex marriage law | The Jakarta PostSenators on Wednesday debated whether to allow gays to wed and make Argentina the first country in Latin America to grant same-sex marriages all the rights of heterosexual unions.



The disputed proposal is backed by the government of President Cristina Fernandez, but is strongly opposed by Argentina's Roman Catholic Church and evangelical groups, which staged a massive march in Buenos Aires on Tuesday that drew 60,000 people.



As the debate continued into the night Wednesday, supporters and opponents of same-sex marriage kept vigil outside the Congress building in Buenos Aires.



The measure, which was approved by the lower house of Congress in May, would give same-sex couples the same rights as heterosexual ones.



Same-sex civil unions have been legalized in Uruguay, Buenos Aires and some states in Mexico and Brazil. Mexico City has legalized gay marriage. But Argentina would be the first country in Latin America to legalize same-sex marriage, which generally carries more exclusive rights than civil unions, including adopting children and inheriting wealth



"Nearly every political and social figure has spoken out in favor of marriage equality for everyone," said Maria Rachid, president of the Argentine Federation of Lesbians, Gays, Bisexuals and Transsexuals. "And we hope that the Senate reflects this and that Argentina, from today forward, is a more just country for all families."



As a small group of the law's opponents said the Hail Mary prayer nearby, Eduardo Morales said he thought the legislation was concocted by Buenos Aires residents out step with the views of the country.



"They want to convert this city into the gay capitol of the world' said Morales, a teacher from the province of San Luis.



"We want to remind the senate that marriage is an institution that, for centuries, has been between a man and a woman. This is not discrimination, because the essence of a family is between two people of opposite sexes. Any variation goes against the law, and against nature," Ines Franck, director of the group Familias Argentinas, said on Tuesday.



Fernandez, on an official visit to China earlier this week, spoke out against the Catholic Church's attempts to thwart the law and the tone that the critiques of some religious groups have taken.



"It's very worrisome to hear words like 'God's war' or 'the devil's project,' things that recall the times of the Inquisition," she said.



Fernandez's husband, former President Nestor Kirchner who is currently a congressman, has been a strong supporter of the legislation.



Some opposition leaders have accused the couple of promoting this initiative with an eye on next year's presidential elections, when many speculate that Kirchner will run again.



But Edgardo Mocca, a political science professor at the University of Buenos Aires, disagreed and emphasized the importance of Senate votes expected late Wednesday.



Argentine society is in a "transcendent moment," Mocca said, with the chance to decide whether the rules governing the lives of its citizens will be decided by the Church or democratically elected officials.



The Kirchners won't necessarily suffer politically if the proposal fails, said Roberto Bacman, executive director of the Center for Public Opinion Studies in Buenos Aires.



"It will remain to be seen how the people interpret it, whether they see it as a defeat of the Kirchners or as a defeat of the rights of minorities. If they take it as a defeat of the rights of minorities, the Kirchners won't be damaged," he said.



Senators will first vote on whether or not to approve a resolution against same sex marriage, that was approved by a majority of members of a senate commission last week. If the resolution is voted down, they will vote on a resolution in favor of same sex marriage.



Nine gay couples have already married in Argentina after petitioning judges.