IMO view: Should RI legalize same sex marriage? | The Jakarta PostLast week, I read the headline of a new survey by the Indonesian Survey Circle (LSI) that uncovered the growing intolerance of minorities with the highest level of hostility directed towards the gay and lesbian community. 



The survey disclosed that 80.6 percent of its sample population objected to having gay or lesbian neighbors, jumping significantly from 64.7 percent in 2005. 



It further showed increasing homophobia, saying that the respondents — who were mostly male, having low-income and limited education — would rather live next door to followers of deviants sects than homosexuals. To be honest, I was in a dilemma. 



For me personally, I tolerate and acknowledge the existence of gays and lesbians. I used to have gay neighbors back in my hometown and a gay classmate during high school. We got along fine as we both respected our own private affairs, not stepping on each other’s toes. I respect their choice of life but I don’t justify or rationalize it. Yet, if asked further, I would go as far to say I don’t accept same-sex marriage being legalized in Indonesia the way it has in the United States, Canada, etc.



In spite of this, I strongly disagree with aggression and hostility directed towards them in their pursuance of happiness and economic advancement. Violence never offers a solution whatsoever but rather gross human violation and conflict. 



As human beings, homosexuals are also entitled to basic human rights such as the right to live, the right to work as well as be politically active and elected as a member of any union or council in Indonesia.



Nevertheless, if the election has been conducted in a free, fair and transparent manner and the result does not favor them, they should not jump to the conclusion that their defeat was as a result of intolerance or discrimination. As a member of the larger society, they have the duty to respect and abide by the existing norms, rules and regulation. 



They cannot force society as a whole to accept their sexual preference. If they don’t get elected, it means the majority of people disagree with their choice of life. Further, I find it hard to accept same-sex marriage in Indonesia as it is against religious teachings as well as standard norms and values. 



Herlina

Jakarta