Protests mark International Human Rights Day in Indonesia | The ...International Human Rights Day, which falls on Monday, is being marked with rallies staged by the marginalized throughout the archipelago, protesting against human rights violations that still mar the country’s development.

Dozens of farmers, for example, staged a rally on Jl. Pahlawan in Semarang, Central Java, protesting against their forced eviction by the government to make way for the construction of the Logung Dam in Kudus Regency.

They demanded the government to pay attention to the welfare of the farmers affected by the dam construction, which began in 2010, said one of the protesters, Kasnadi, a 35-year-old farmer in Kandang Mas.

“Our livelihoods depend on those lands,” he said.

The dam, located in the villages of Tanjungrejo in Jekulo and Kandang Mas in Dawe, occupies 196 hectares of land owned by 400 heads of households.

Besides losing their livelihoods, the farmers were also cheated by the government as they were not compensated well enough, said Kasnadi.

“We weren’t involved [in the discussion]. They suddenly just slapped a Rp 28,000 – Rp 30,000 price tag per meter, which was too cheap for our land,” he said.

Some 100 activists under the Society Alliance for Justice (AMUK), meanwhile, staged a rally at the Yogyakarta Police headquarters, urging the government to solve long-neglected human rights violations such as the riots in May 1998 and the 1997 and 1998 Trisakti and Semanggi tragedies.

“The government has to solve these cases so that victims of the tragedies can receive protection, instead of the violators,” said AMUK coordinator Angga during the rally on Monday.

The transgender community, who has been a target of discrimination by hard line groups in the country, also voiced its protests in front of the State Palace in Central Jakarta.

Dozens of transgender people donned colorful outfits usually reserved for a parade as they held signs with messages such as “LGBT [Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender] rights are human rights” and “Stop discrimination and violence based on sexual orientations”, as reported by tribunnews.com. (han/iwa)