By the way: Sometimes it takes standing up and being counted | The ...On a recent weekday morning, I quit my usual officious, better-look-busy act to sneak a coffee at a hotel restaurant. One of the executives stopped by and said he was seeking a new fitness center manager.

Fitness center managers everywhere, listen up for one important requirement.

“We don’t want anybody who is keriting [literally curly],” he said.

Why the ban on proudly Afro-wearing and buffed trainers?

No, the job wasn’t off-limits to members of the Australian rock group who have given up their wild ways to become fitness gurus. What they don’t want is a stereotypical gay man flitting here and there among the fitness machines, upsetting members with limp-wristed entreaties to “feel the burn”. Richard Simmons, take those teeny-tiny short-shorts and get out of town.

I ate my pride — as I have for most of my life in such situations — and mumbled something neutral. I confess, none-too-proudly, that I also felt a sense of satisfaction that I had passed inspection as one of the straight boys.

It was another experience in being the odd man out in this heterosexual world of ours. That night, I faced the reality again, when during the debate on the parliament’s Bank Century  hearings, the female TV host kept on using the term banci. One of the panel countered that it was offensive, prompting an apology, but it seemed more about having that term — basically equivalent to “faggot” — used for party members than about stigmatizing transsexuals.

While I took my morning encounter in stride, this incident riled me up. Although the notoriously aggressive interrogator was merely repeating a term used by others, surely she could have used another instead of this offensive and discriminatory term.

For many of the gays, lesbians, transsexuals and transvestites in this country, I believe, are much braver people than most of us, facing discrimination and stigmatization at every turn, most recently with the canceling of this week’s sexual minorities conference in Surabaya. Tellingly, the US gay rights movement began when drag queens fought back against the police at New York City’s Stonewall bar, and one of the first gay rights groups in Southeast Asia was founded in the early 1980s in Java, reportedly prompted by the drowning deaths of transvestites fleeing from the police.

Most of us here still choose to hide behind masks, operating by the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy prevalent in Indonesian society, even though gay men and women are prominent figures in urban areas, in entertainment, fashion and the media. Jakarta has gay nights at clubs and spas, and there is a popular Tatu-like singing duo (is she or isn’t she, only their music svengali knows for sure).

For most of us, though, it’s simply easier and more convenient to keep one foot in the closet and one foot out with those we can trust.

Growing up outside Indonesia, long before the gay-friendly days of Glee and Will and Grace, I felt fortunate to be able to “pass” most of the time. Today, though, past the age of 40 and having dealt with my own set of issues, I don’t lie when people ask if I am married — for all intents and purposes I am, in a 10-year relationship — but neither do I create an awkward situation by telling all. The people who matter most to me know who I am; there is not much I can do about the people who will judge me by this simple but important fact about who I am, save to show them the same respect that I hope they will accord me as a person, living his life.

I’ve never been one to take a political stance about who I am, except for a brief period in my early 20s when I was basically shouting it from every mountain (and I cringe when I look back at that today).

But, unlike many of my gay peers, as a longterm expatriate, the “other” in Indonesian society, and working in an office that promotes pluralism, I have more freedom to just be me. No, I wouldn’t attend the conference in Surabaya, not because I would be ashamed or afraid (I hope), but because my life is at a different stage. Still, I think it’s about time that I stand up and be counted in supporting the right of others to gather for their, and my, rights.