Gay activists in Serbia hit back at authorities on Saturday for banning this weekend's gay pride parade.



"This is a sad day for Serbia, and not one but one hundred steps back for human rights in this country," said Jovanka Todorovic, one of the event organizers, told news agency AFP.



Serbia's Interior Ministry cited security concerns as justification for cancelling the event and a number of counter protests on Friday after violence erupted at the event last year.



"We are banning all gatherings this weekend on October 1 and 2. Police will stop every gathering by all means," Interior Minister Ivica Dacic told B92 television.



"They are not banned because of the nature of the protests but to prevent jeopardizing public order and peace," he added.



It's the second time in three years that the Serbian gay pride parade has been cancelled due to threats by ultra-nationalists. 



Last year, the first gay pride parade in 10 years was sabotaged by violent riots in which more than 100 people were injured. Cars were burned and shops were looted in clashes between police and far-right extremists. 



Widespread 'homophobia'



Organizers, who have been planning the parade for four months, described the ban on Friday as the "capitulation of the state to the hooligans." 





"They don't want a pride parade. It is a lack of political will," said one of the organizers Goran Miletic, pledging to keep on with preparations for the parade in 2012.Nevena Petrusic, Serbia's commissioner for equality, also criticized the ban, insisting that it was a clear sign of the high level of homophobia in Serbia."The atmosphere of fear, threats of violence and numerous serious acts of discrimination - which are illegal and punishable - have reached a peak and achieved their goal," Petrusic said in a statement.According to police, anti-gay extremists had planned to set buildings on fire in the suburbs of Belgrade on Sunday, and clash with police in the city center.In statements on their websites, ultra-nationalists celebrated the ban as a "victory."Author: Charlotte Chelsom-Pill (AP, AFP)Editor: Ben Knight