The first polls close shortly in US midterm elections that are widely forecast to hand control of both houses of Congress to opposition Republicans, and potentially further complicate President Barack Obama's legislative agenda during his final two years in office.

US voters took to the polls Tuesday to elect a new Congress and select governors in 36 states. The center-right Republicans are largely expected to win the seats needed for a narrow majority in the 100-seat Senate, and widen their existing majority in the 435-seat House of Representatives.

"We've given the other side six years to have their way," life-long Republican Charles Kaster said after casting his ballot in the state of Virginia. "It doesn't seem to be working out to good."

"I've had enough of the Democrats, actually. They're doing a lousy job," fellow Virginia voter Lorie McKay said. "I don't always vote Republican. I'm just not liking what the Democrats say."

Public opinion polls give Republicans a greater than 50 percent chance of picking up the six seats they need to take control of the Senate, a prospect that has Democrats bracing for additional legislative paralysis. Thirty-three Senatorial spots are up for grabs.

Turnout is usually lower in midterms, and the electorate skews older and less diverse. Democrats have sought to block a Republican takeover by reaching out to minorities, women, and the young - groups that trend Democratic and normally sit out midterm elections.

"I voted all Democrat. I guess it's because I'm young," 20-year-old chemistry student Alexis Sickovitch said. "Some of the conservatives (on the ballot) are against abortion and birth control, and those are pretty important to me."

Plagued by low approval numbers, President Obama avoided campaigning with vulnerable Democrats and instead limited his campaign appearances mainly to gubernatorial races in states where he remains popular.

"There are two people on the ballot tomorrow, me and Scott Brown," incumbent New Hampshire Democratic Senator Jeanne Shaheen said, seeking to show her independence of the president.

Obama has made it clear that he views the midterm elections as a referendum on his policies, but his administration has faced questions about its competency, with voters expressing disapproval over recent secret service scandals, and the botched roll out of his signature healthcare program known as Obamacare.

Polls also give Republicans the perceived edge on the handling of national security issues such as terrorism and the emergence of the "Islamic State" militia group in Iraq and Syria.

In addition to choosing representatives and govenors, voters will cast judgment on several controversial ballot initiatives in several states Tuesday.

Voters in the states of Alaska, Florida, Oregon and Washington were able to vote for or against varying degrees of marijuana legalization, be it for medicinal or recreational use.

The state of Arizona, which issued a constitutional ban on same-sex marriage in 2009, has put gay marriage to a referendum.

And in Colorado, North Dakota, and Tennessee, initiatives concerning abortion rights were also on the ballot.