Thousands of people protested the racist ideology of far-right groups in cities across Germany this weekend in response to a spate of recent attacks against foreigners. The rallies and concerts aimed to show solidarity with Germany's immigrant community.

The demonstrations also sparked several attacks blamed on neo-Nazis or on people with anti-immigrant views.

Neo-Nazi youths allegedly hit two teenaged girls in the face with sticks. The girls were waiting outside a concert being held against right-wing extremism on Saturday in the western city of Stolberg.

Approximately two hours after the attack in Stolberg, police were called to another part of town where more than a dozen young people were reportedly yelling "Heil Hitler." A dozen buildings in Stolberg, including a church and school, were also tagged with graffiti bearing swastikas over the weekend.



In Halberstadt, a city in the eastern German region of Saxony-Anhalt, two young men with extreme right views reportedly attacked a group of leftist teenagers on Friday who were headed to a party in the city center. According to police, the attackers gave the Nazi salute. Two of the teenagers were injured when the attackers began punching and hitting them with a glass bottle.

In Stuttgart, a 38-year-old from Sri Lanka was assaulted Saturday morning. A 27-year-old, who police said had extreme-right views, asked him where he came from. When the Sri Lankan responded, the man knocked him over. The victim was brought to the hospital as a precautionary measure.

A series of racist attacks have occurred across Germany in recent weeks against both Africans and Indians.

Protesting neo-Nazis



The racist attacks have been condemned by German leaders. Various protests against neo-Nazis have been organized across Germany in the week since the attacks.

Several people were injured in Dortmund Saturday when between 1,000 and 2,000 people protesting neo-Nazis came into conflict with about 400 right-wing extremists. In Neuruppin, a city in the eastern state of Brandenburg, about 1,000 people took part in a march against 61 neo-Nazis Saturday. Several people ended up being injured when police used pepper spray to keep the groups apart.