In this programme: Expatriate Egyptians rally for the right to vote - Teaching young Cambodians about Khmer Rouge atrocities – A need for transparency in the trade of raw materials – Gay rights activists acknowledged in Uganda

When ultra-communist party, the Khmer Rouge came to power in Cambodia in 1975, leader Pol Pot started a brutal war against his own people. One of the first groups targeted for execution were the educated - doctors, engineers, teachers. But now, more than three decades on, modern Cambodia has begun to rely on its educators, to teach the country about that tumultuous period. Audios and videos on the topic Click to listen to our report on teaching Khmer Rouge history in Cambodia

Natural resources are becoming rarer and more expensive. Precious metals and stones, like gold and diamonds cost a lot more than that charged on the world market - mining these materials damages the environment, often leads to a destruction of livelihoods for local people, and also enhances exploitation and conflict. Audios and videos on the topic Click to listen to our report on the raw material trade

A group supporting homosexuals in Uganda, Sexual Minorities Uganda, will be awarded the annual Rafto Prize for its work fighting for homosexual rights in the country. Homosexuals, who go public in Uganda, risk being discriminated against, beaten up and raped. Lillian is a Ugandan journalist and homosexual, who was has been granted asylum in Germany. Audios and videos on the topic Click to listen to our report on Ugandan gay rights activists

Non resident Egyptians rally for the right to vote Tahrir Square in Egypt fascinated the world in January with passionate calls for democracy. Nine months after Mubarak's ouster, Egyptian expatriates are still wondering if they will be permitted to vote in this month's elections. Egyptian papesr reported this Wednesday that Cairo's justice ministry agreed to a constitutional amendment allowing Egyptians abroad to vote–a timeframe has not been set. Audios and videos on the topic Click to listen to our report on Egyptians abroad rallying for the right to vote