On today's program: How much longer can the Swiss maintain banking secrecy? - A suicide in Notre Dame highlights the French divide over gay marriage - An operatic twist to Spanish austerity - The wealthy rev up in Copenhagen - Is anti-semiticism on the rise in Hungary? - Companies find it pays to be differently abled - Turning bamboo into bikes in Berlin - Running is the new clubbing for women

The EU has pledged to end banking secrecy across its 27 members by the year's end. Officials say tax fraud and evasion costs the EU an estimated one trillion euros a year. But they also believe much of that money is hidden in non EU member Switzerland, which is clinging to its long tradition of banking secrecy. But can Switzerland resist the pressure to change? Imogen Foulkes reports from Geneva. Audios and videos on the topic Listen to: Can the Swiss maintain banking secrecy?

In Paris’s Notre Dame Cathedral this week a far-right essayist committed suicide in front of several hundred tourists. He did this shortly after going on a right-wing radio station to criticize the legalization of gay marriage. From Paris, John Laurenson has this Postcard about the debate that has divided the country in two. Audios and videos on the topic

It's now exactly three years since Spain began a program of spending cuts and tax increases. Throughout that time, those austerity measures have faced plenty of resistance - street demonstrations and strikes have become increasingly common. But one group of Spaniards has found an unusual, musical, way of voicing their anger. Guy Hedgecoe reports from Madrid. Audios and videos on the topic Listen to: An operatic twist to Spanish austerity

The wealthy rev up in Copenhagen One of the world’s most outrageous car rallies set off from the Danish capital Copenhagen this week. A hundred predominantly luxury cars were taking part in Gumball 3000 - a chance for some of the world’s richest petrol heads or motoring enthusiasts to flaunt their wealth during a drive taking them through 13 countries en route to Monaco. Malcolm Brabant was with them at the starting line. Audios and videos on the topic Listen to: The wealthy rev up in Copenhagen

The Czech Republic’s new president, Milos Zeman, has been embroiled in a row after just two months in his post. He tried to block the appointment of a university professor who’d taken part in a gay rights rally. Critics say it's a test of how far he can flex his presidential muscles – and he’s given considerable wiggle room by the rather vague Czech constitution. Rob Cameron has more from Prague. Audios and videos on the topic

Companies are finding it pays to be 'differently abled' The German software giant, SAP, is to recruit people with autism to make full use of their talents to process information. The scheme's in conjunction with Danish company Specialisterne, or The Specialists. It was set up in 2004 with the aim of enabling a million people with autism around the world to get jobs. To find out more, Helen Seeney spoke to Steen Thygesen, the CEO of The Specialists. Audios and videos on the topic Listen to: Companies are finding it pays to be 'differently abled'

Is anti-semiticism on the rise in Hungary? Hungary is home to around 100,000 Jews, one of the biggest communities in Europe. In recent years there's been a modest revival of Jewish culture. But there's growing anti-semiticism in Hungary, much of which has been spearheaded by the far right Jobbik Party. The government has taken some steps against anti-semiticism, but Jewish leaders say it's not enough. Igal Avidan reports from Budapest. Audios and videos on the topic Listen to: Is anti-semiticism on the rise in Hungary?

If you've ever seen building sites in many developing countries you might have marveled at the strength of bamboo scaffolding. Bamboo is a natural material proven for its durability and high strength-to-weight ratio in construction, housing and furniture. But what about in the construction of bicycles? Guy Degen has been finding out more – in, of all places, Berlin. Audios and videos on the topic Listen to: Turning bamboo into bikes in Berlin

Is running the new clubbing for Europe's women Women across the continent are getting out their running shoes. Five major European cities are staging unique night runs for female runners in a celebration of sport and style. The events, “We Own the Night”, are organised and sponsored by sports brand Nike – and taking place this month in Amsterdam, Berlin, Paris, Milan and London, where the series kicked off last weekend. Joanna Impey has more. Audios and videos on the topic Listen to: Is running the new clubbing for Europe's women