On today's program: Joining the battle for Britain's streets - Is France also on the brink of social unrest? - Greece's best and brightest pack their bags- Are Austria's light-up laws all smoke and mirrors? - Power to the people in Iceland - The Berlin Wall makes a comeback on its 50th anniversary - Promoting gay pride in Prague - Craftsmen in Florence pay the price of progress.

The UK has seen its worst outbreak of rioting and looting for thirty years. London and a handful of other major cities were affected. At least half a dozen people died in the disturbances. More than 100 million pounds worth of damage was done. Many young people were involved in the riots - some as young as 11 years old. Prime Minister David Cameron said the rioters were motivated mostly by greed. He called the unrest "a sign of a broken and sick society". From London Stephen Beard reports. Audios and videos on the topic

Is France on the brink of social unrest? The riots and clashes in the UK have sent shockwaves throughout Europe. And many have been taken aback by the unprecedented level of violence. Yet only six years ago, Europe witnessed a similar outbreak of unrest – on the streets of France. The deaths of two teenagers in the Paris suburb Clichy sous Bois in October 2005 sparked violent protests and riots. Despite a police crackdown and money for social programs, the situation in France's suburban ghettos has hardly improved. Andreas Illmer has more. Audios and videos on the topic Is France on the brink of social unrest?

Greece's best and brightest pack their bags If you're young and well-educated in southern Europe, good luck finding a decent job. The economies of Spain, Portugal, Italy and, of course, Greece have been stagnant for years. But in Greece the debt crisis and austerity measures have destroyed the job market, and that's starting to fuel a massive brain drain. Joanna Kakissis reports from Athens. Audios and videos on the topic Greece's best and brightest pack their bags

Are Austria's light-up laws all smoke and mirrors? Europe is slowly moving towards tougher rules on smoking in public places. But one country is moving more slowly than most. Austria, long known as a smokers paradise, recently introduced a smoking ban in cafès and restaurants, with heavy fines for those who break the rules. In fact it's just been reported that Hollywood action man and former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger has been fined for smoking in his country of birth. But as Kerry Skyring reports from Vienna there's more smoke than fines. Audios and videos on the topic Are Austria's light-up laws all smoke and mirrors?

Iceland gives power to the people The people of Iceland have been taking part in a unique experiment in direct democracy with the assistance of technology. A group of ordinary citizens have drafted a new constitution which was posted online, so that other Icelanders could give their feedback on it. The draft document will now be examined by a parliamentary committee. This exercise stems from the country's economic collapse in 2008 which triggered massive social movements. There was pressure for a new constitution and calls for ordinary citizens to be involved in drawing it up. Nadine Wojcik has been finding out more in Reykjavik. Audios and videos on the topic Iceland gives power to the people

This weekend it's 50 years since construction work began on the Berlin Wall. It was built by the East German authorities and completely cut off the western side of the city, symbolizing the Cold War divide. After German unification, almost all the 160 kilometres of the Wall were torn down or chiseled away by souvenir hunters. But today there's renewed interest in the Berlin Wall and the anniversary has sparked new books, exhibitions, films and seminars. Our Berlin correspondent is Gavin Blackburn. Helen Seeney asked him how much of the Wall still remains? Audios and videos on the topic

The Czech capital Prague is currently playing host to its first ever gay pride festival. Prague is a pretty gay-friendly place, with a number of gay clubs and bars and a growing reputation as a gay tourist destination. But the festival has also aroused some strong passions amongst politicians and officials. Rob Cameron has this Postcard from Prague. Audios and videos on the topic

Is gay conversion therapy taking off in Europe? Gay pride parades are taking place around the world this summer. While such events are popular in countries such as Germany, where some cities boast a large gay scene, homosexuality is not necessarily accepted across the board as a part of human sexuality. In fact, here in Germany an increasing number of fundamentalist groups are trying to convert gays and lesbians into heterosexuals. Conversion therapy, as it's called, has been making waves for several years in the United States. Now there's increasing concern among gay rights organizations that these groups are strengthening their foothold in Europe. Laura Schweiger reports. Audios and videos on the topic Is gay conversion therapy taking off in Europe?

Craftsmen in Florence are paying the price of progress Florence in Italy is one of Europe's most beautiful cities – and for centuries, it was one of the richest. That wealth was in part due to high quality crafts that were produced in Florence. Goldsmiths, engravers, furniture makers, wood carvers and sculptors - their work once beautified many of the great houses of Europe and their skills were handed down through the generations. But these artisans have found the past few decades tough. Many have packed up and left Florence. But a few still remain, clinging to their traditional skills in their centuries old workshops. Jean Di Marino has been finding out more. Audios and videos on the topic Craftsmen in Florence are paying the price of progress