Martin Moore, whose brother Nik was killed in the Admiral Duncan pub on 30 April, spoke at the launch of the gay rights group Stonewall's campaign to repeal section 28 of the 1988 Local Government Act.

Teachers - restricted by the provisions of the section - should be allowed to say being gay was "normal" for a certain number of people, he said.

The campaign has been launched in the wake of the government putting on hold a commitment to repeal section 28.

The controversial section, introduced during Margaret Thatcher's premiership, bars local authorities from promoting tolerance and understanding of homosexuality.

Choking back tears, Mr Moore told campaigners packed into Parliament's Grand Committee Room: "My brother Nik was gay. Nik had the right to respect as an individual.

"He had the right to equal treatment in law. He had the right to walk our streets with his head held up. For Nik's sake, let's act now to ensure these rights for all of us."

Campaigners fear the section might not be pulled until after the next general election, although Labour MP Beverley Hughes told the meeting the government would take action "as soon as a suitable legislative opportunity presents itself".

Angela Mason, executive director of Stonewall, said whether the government repealed the section would be a "litmus test" of its commitment to gay and lesbian rights.

But the director of the Christian Institute, Colin Hart, defended the section saying it was "introduced because some councils were spending inordinate amounts of money promoting homosexuality in schools".

He said: "Some 70% of men believe that homosexual practice is wrong.

"They are not bigots or terrorists as some leading gay rights campaigners are now implying by linking their section 28 campaign with the Soho bombing.

"Parents do not want teachers being told to promote homosexuality to their children."

Before the campaign launch Labour MP David Lepper, who is a former teacher, said section 28 is "so badly drafted it has never been used".

"As far as I'm aware nobody has ever been prosecuted under section 28. But nevertheless it has had a very insidious effect."