Presented by Reverend Richard Coles, the programme features contributions from Stonewall’s former chief executive Ben Summerskill and the Liberal Democrat MP Lynne Featherstone.

Asked whether it was true to say Stonewall was not entirely enthusiastic about gay marriage in 2010, the organisation’s former chief executive, Ben Summerskill, said: “No. We were cautious about our policy position for two reasons. First, 10 per cent of lesbian and gay people are completely opposed to equal marriage. We now have polling evidence to that effect. But at that point we had said we would consult all of our stakeholders about what they wanted, and if we had announced in the middle of a consultation that we had already made up our mind, we wouldn’t have kept that 10 per cent on board because they would have said, you went through this sham consultation and you had already announced what the outcome was going to be. And those are people, quite often for example lesbians, who feel very strongly that marriage is a 2,000-year-old vehicle for the subjugation of women, and they don’t like it at all. And I think what we have succeeded in doing, certainly with Stonewall stakeholders and our support has continued to rise throughout that period, is to persuade them that even if they don’t want to get married, other people should be able to.”

Talking about the Liberal Democrats’ coming to power in 2010, he continued: “The other thing I’m crystal clear about in retrospect – and it was clear to us at the time, but we’re able to say it now – is that the sudden adoption of a commitment to equal marriage by the Liberal Democrats was actually quite opportunistic and cynical in the summer of 2010, and the reason we can say that with certainty is that in the Liberal Democrat manifesto in May 2010, three months earlier, there had been no mention of it whatsoever. Even more revealingly, in the Liberal Democrat gay manifesto in May 2010, there had been no mention of equal marriage whatsoever, and suddenly this was alighted upon by some Liberal Democrats, and one of them admitted at the time, once this policy had been adopted by the Liberal Democrats, isn’t this fantastic, we can now put clear blue water between us and the Conservatives. So it was a way of positioning themselves as opposed to the government.”

In response to these comments, Liberal Democrat MP Lynne Featherstone, who was appointed equalities minister in 2010, said: “Wow, I’m really upset by that. Really upset.”

Lynne Featherstone was the first to take the issue of equal marriage to the Conservative Home Secretary, Theresa May, and denies the charge that it was a cynical and opportunistic move: “That’s absolute rubbish, it’s absolute rubbish. I mean, Liberal Democrats have always… you know, we are the party of equality, and Ben knows that. And the fact it wasn’t in the manifesto probably because no one thought it could be achieved, not for any lack of desire to do it. But, you know, I wasn’t particularly going to raise this, but you have to say Stonewall were not in favour of equal marriage, and they changed, and I’m very grateful they changed, and I had Ben in and I told him what I was about to do and persuaded him to support it, and he did, and his support was fulsome and helpful, so it’s somewhat upsetting to find that that is his attitude because I thought we were all working together on this, and I did it by building allies in all the parties and all the groups and all the activists to bring everybody together. That was the only way we were going to get this through. But very surprised and disappointed that Ben would say that. And it’s completely unnecessary.”

Gay Rights: Tying The Knot? is on Radio 4 on Tuesday 18 March at 8pm.