In the Church of England, many Anglican clergy already bless same-sex couples on an unofficial basis but there is no authorised ceremony in England.

The Anglican Communion still remains divided on the issue of homosexuality. Its first openly gay bishop - Gene Robinson of New Hampshire - visited the UK in November 2005 to celebrate the tenth anniversary of Changing Attitude, a group which campaigns for equality for lesbian and gay Anglicans in Britain.

Bishop Robinson was married for 13 years and has two daughters. He has lived in a close relationship with his partner, Mark Andrews, for more than 16 years. His election as bishop prompted a group of 19 bishops, led by Bishop Robert Duncan of Pittsburgh Diocese, to make a statement warning of a possible schism between the Episcopal Church and the Anglican Communion.

The United Church of Christ became the largest Christian denomination in the United States to endorse gay marriage in July 2005. The Church passed a resolution in favour of same-sex marriage and called on its 1.3 million-strong membership to back wedding policies "that do not discriminate against couples based on gender."

The vote was not binding on individual churches but there are still fears that some congregations who are unhappy with the decision may leave the fold.

In an article in the Chicago Tribune, journalist Ron Grossman described the resolution as a "milestone" demonstrating that religions are not "immutable" or "graven in stone."

He argued: "Religions are not immune to a basic law of history: Everything changes. Over time, some faiths become more conservative, others more liberal."

Quakers have been welcoming same-sex unions for almost two decades.

In 1987, British Quakers agreed that local groups could celebrate same-sex commitments through special acts of worship. The Quakers were the first member of Churches Together in Britain and Ireland to sanction the official blessing of same-sex relationships.

A same-sex commitment follows a similar format to a Quaker wedding. The couple exchange vows within their worshipping community.

Robert Card, co-clerk of the Quaker Lesbian and Gay Fellowship said: "There aren't many religious lesbian and gay groups which can cheerfully endorse their faith group's position. Quakers can."