Some gay people in Scotland have called the Scottish government "weak" in not supporting gay marriage sooner.

On Tuesday (17 July) the parliament decided it needed more time to consider the issue but a decision will be made before the end of July.

If it does agree to it it would be the first country in the UK where gay marriages would be legal.

The Church of Scotland and the Catholic Church are strongly against it.

There are only a handful of well established gay bars in Edinburgh.

They are situated on what's known as Edinburgh's "pink triangle".

Inside one bar, newly-engaged James and Kevin are having a couple of drinks while they discuss wedding plans.

"A church would be nice, that's what we want," he said.

"It's a place that makes you feel comfortable and safe."

She says she is in no hurry to settle down but when she does, she would like the choice of where to get married.

She said: "Even if you have the same legal rights it's not the same as being married.

"For some, being married means more than having a civil partnership."

At the top of the pink triangle sits a Catholic church.

They are one of the religious groups who are against gay marriage. They say it is against their religious freedom to be forced to perform these ceremonies.

Outside another bar, Fraser Douglas is chatting with his friends.

He thinks churches will be discouraging people from going.

He said: "I think they need to be a bit more open-minded and there are so many people moving away from religion anyway.

"If they want to bring more people to their church, they need to get with the times."

A few hours after the Scottish Government failed to make a decision on the matter, the bars start filling up on the triangle.

Some gay marriage campaigners have already criticised them for being too weak but 28-year-old Iain Aitken thinks it's good the decision isn't being rushed.

"It's OK, everyone does have their own opinion.

I don't agree with the church but you still have to listen to them. They do speak for a lot of people."

A few tables along, Morvern Cunningham is celebrating her friend's birthday.

She says it's just good the country is talking about it.

"I am very proud of the Scottish government in so many ways. This would be amazing if it was to go through."