Two London couples have "married" in a ceremony watched by mayor Ken Livingstone.

Their relationships were formally noted under the London Partnerships Register, an initiative set up by the mayor, Ken Livingstone.

Playwright Linda Wilkinson, 49, and IT consultant Carol Budd, 48, from Bethnal Green, said signing the London Partnerships Register was a political statement.

The ceremony was watched by friends of the couple and members of the media.

Holding hands as they stood in front of 25 guests, Ms Wilkinson and Ms Budd said they did not believe the ceremony was a wedding.

"We are not doing this to ape heterosexual marriage.

"We are doing this because we believe it is another nail in the coffin of the prejudice that denies us our fundamental rights as human beings and makes us second class citizens in our own country."

Ian Burford and Alexander Cannell, of south London, were the first couple to register their relationship of 38 years.

Mr Burford and Mr Cannell were dressed in white suits for their five-minute ceremony conducted by Rob Coward, a specially-trained officer with Greater London Authority.

Mr Burford thanked Mr Livingstone and the gay rights campaigner Angela Mason for championing equality under the law.

He said: "Throughout that 38 years I have the love, friendship and support of Alex and throughout what ever years are left to us, he knows that he has my love, friendship and support."

Couples taking part in the ceremony will receive a certificate but the register will not be made available to the public for confidentiality reasons.

The Greater London Authority is the first public body in the country to recognise same-sex relationships as being on a par with heterosexual partnerships.

Mr Livingstone said: "Although our register is only a small step on the road to equality, I would like it to act as a trigger for real change."

Heterosexual couples will also be able to put their names on the register which is intended to be self-financing at a cost of £85.

Mr Livingstone believes the scheme will help in disputes over issues such as housing, taxation, inheritance rights, pensions, immigration and family law.