American civil rights activist Angela Davis, once regarded as a dangerous radical, now a respected academic. What does she have to say about being black in 21st century America? The paedophile men who target women to have their children : what it’s like when you find out your children have been sexually abused by their father . Lisa Lovatt-Smith: the Vogue picture editor who worked with Anna Wintour and David Bailey and all the top supermodels…then went to Ghana and her life changed completely. And the Scottish Zambian singer-songwriter Namvula Download 20MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

The former first lady of France, Valerie Trierweiler gives her side of the very public break-up with President Francois Hollande. Jane hears about the campaign run by the charity, Mosac, to stop parents who've abused their children continuing to disrupt their lives even after they've been convicted. Hilary Clinton could be poised to win the White House in 2016 but the political representation of women in national and state legislatures is still very poor. Sue Carroll, Professor of Political Science at Rutgers University, gives her views. The Annotated Autobiography Pioneer Girl goes back to the original mansucripts of Laura Ingalls Wilder, author of A Little House on the Prairie . Jane talks to the editor-in-chief Nancy Tystad Koupal and to the author, Tracy Chevalier. Download 23MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

What impact do hormones have on women during their lives? Jane is joined by a panel who answer your questions and discusses topics including PMT and HRT. Guests include psychiatrist Dr Michael Craig, Dr Amanda Howe, who is a GP in Norwich, Dr Annie Evans, Dr Jan Toledano, from the Marion Gluck Clinic, and actress and writer Helen Lederer. Download 23MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

PD James died this week. She was 94. She wrote 19 best selling novels; had two distinguished careers in hospital administration and as a civil servant; was a magistrate, a Governor of the BBC, a member of the arts council and the British Council. Download 7MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

It's the end of our Listener Week - catch up on some of the highlights including how to cope if your partner is addicted to porn, the feminist construction worker who wants to tackle sexist comments in the workplace, and the social workers who want to change your mind about the profession. Download 26MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

It’s the final day of listener week and Angela wrote to ask us about a very tricky question – who takes care of the personal grooming of someone who’s being cared for? Afondness for a tribute band – Karel Lush takes us to a seventies night with an ersatz Stylistics. And we answer Sarah's question about how to explain her sexuality to her 7 year old daughter – at what point do you tell your child you’re gay. And as the week comes to a close – a review – by two of our most devoted fans and critics. Download 21MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

Money - what we earn, what we spend and how we really feel it; the fifteen-year-old listener campaigning to give teenage girls body confidence; Margaret Rope - the stained glass artist who's been hidden from history; your advice on calling out sexist colleagues; and, what being asexual means. Download 21MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

Listener week day 3: Is there too much pressure to breastfeed? Listeners interview Queen of Slapstick Miranda Hart. Dilemma - how should people without family plan for their old age? What the best and most cost effective way to keep fit over 50? Lawyer turned Country singer Rebecca Bains. Download 18MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

Today we hear about the closure of refuges all across the country but particularly looking at the Exeter refuge that shut in March of this year. Fleur Buechler, the manager of the refuge, joins Jane. Emily tells us how that closure left her with her abusive partner for months longer than she wanted to be. Mandy Young raised funds to create the largest sports park in Europe in memory of her son. Our listener dilemma today came from Gilliam Wallace. She was joined by Annalisa Barbieri to discuss how old is too old for a child to be living at home? Mary Jarrett wrote in wanting to talk about the joys of social work. She and two other social workers join in the discussion. Jane Corey wanted advice on how to get nice shoes when you have larger than average feet. Download 22MB (right click & "save target as / link as")

The effect of porn on a relationship. Do black, Asian and minority ethnic women get a fair deal in the media? Does 50:50 childcare work as well for children as it can for parents? How a series of sporting challenges helped Paula McGuire from Glasgow boost her confidence in ways she could never have imagined. And a listener asks for advice: should I get back in touch with an ex? Download 23MB (right click & "save target as / link as")