Challenges await new BNPT chief Saud Usman | The Jakarta PostWith less than two weeks left before his term ends, in a bold move President Susilo Bambang Yudho-yono has appointed South Sumatra Police chief Insp. Gen. Saud Usman to lead the National Counterterrorism Agency (BNPT).



Saud will replace Ansyaad Mbai, a retired police general who has led the agency since its establishment in 2010. The inauguration ceremony will be conducted on Oct. 14 at the Office of the Coordinating Political, Legal and Security Affairs Minister, the office’s spokesman, Agus Barnas, said on Thursday.



Agus declined to respond when asked about the replacement of Ansyaad. “It is the authority of the President,” he said.



Terrorism experts have expressed hope that Saud, who led the National Police’s Densus 88 counterterrorism unit in 2009, will strengthen the country’s concerted efforts to tackle terrorism.



“As the former Densus 88 chief, he surely has a good understanding of terrorism networks in Indonesia,” said Noor Huda Ismail, the founder of the Institute of International Peace Building.



Noor Huda said that Saud could design programs targeted at the youth, unemployed and low-income people, who had become the main recruitment targets of terrorist groups.



“Another challenge is the conflict in Syria and Iraq waged by the Islamic State (IS) movement,” he said.



Around 100 Indonesians are believed to have fought alongside IS fighters in the Middle East.



In managing the BNPT, Noor Huda urged Saud to improve the agency’s coordination with relevant agencies, particularly the State Intelligence Agency (BIN) and the Indonesian Military (TNI).



“Collaboration with the TNI and BIN should not stop at formalities, but they need to implement what they have agreed to. Whether they acknowledge it or not, there is a rivalry between the police and the military within the BNPT, which could undermine the effectiveness of the agency,” Noor Huda said.



The current BNPT chief is assisted by three deputies who have backgrounds in the police, TNI and diplomatic corps.



Upon taking over the agency’s leadership, Saud needs to quickly decide on the fate of the BNPT’s 6.1-hectare prison in the International Peace and Security Center (IPSC) complex in Sentul, Bogor, which Ansyaad designated as the center for a deradicalization program for convicted terrorists.



Yudhoyono has criticized the plan, saying that the presence of terrorists in the facility could pose a threat to other security and training facilities at the IPSC.