Issue of the day: New airstrikes hit besieged Syrian town | The ...Oct. 9, Online/AP



The US-led coalition pounded positions of the Islamic State (IS) group in the Syrian border town of Kobani on Thursday in some of the most intensive strikes of the air campaign so far, a Kurdish official and an activist group havesaid.



But despite the airstrikes overnight and into Thursday morning, IS fighters managed to capture a police station in the east of the town, said the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.



The militants now control more than a third of the strategic border town, said the Observatory, a group that tracks Syria’s civil war through a network of activists on the ground.



Your comments: 



The stance of the Turks demonstrates the limitations of this campaign.  



The trap many are falling into is thinking of IS as terrorist guerrillas when in fact they are a de facto state.  As a state they can now consolidate their rule and fight out a battle of attrition in the towns and cities.  



Local forces’ ground offensives are unlikely to be successful, giving IS a chance to ride out the whole affair and await the inevitable war fatigue and the dissolution of the coalition.



Jagera



Turkey could act here, but is waiting for support from the US or NATO.



In fact, there is a far more profound reason for Turkey’s reluctance to act in Kobani — the bad blood with the Kurds runs deep here. The reason is that the Kurdish PKK militant group in Kobani has been attacking Turkey since 1984 to gain territory within Turkish borders.



For many years, Syria’s Assad did nothing to stop the Kurdish PKK from attacking Turkey, so Turkey is against Assad and wants him out of power. If the fall of Kobani meansthat Kurdish PKK territorial ambitions within Turkey crumble too, then so be it.



All civilians from Kobani who do not want to fight Turkey are already in Turkey now and are being protected and given food and humanitarian aid by Turkey and the UN. 



Now all that remains in Kobani is two terrorist groups fighting each other,the PKK wants to drag Turkey into its fight with IS.



Turkey is content to sit back and watch. Later, when the PKK and IS have killed each other, then Turkey will see about giving the Kurdish civilians in Turkey their city Kobani and surrounding territory back.



However, for that, Turkey needs a partner in the US or NATO, as they fear Assad may take such a move as an invasion and try to stop them. Meanwhile, Assad can sit back and watch.



That is the suspicion of many - that the Turkish government is content to see fighting rage in Kobani as IS and the Kurdish militia attack each other. 



It’s been likened to a proxy war, with Ankara watching as IS does Turkey’s bidding, fighting its old Kurdish enemy. 



Turkey fears an autonomous Kurdish region in northern Syria could reignite Kurdish separatism back home. 



 Eddy Saf



My understanding of the terrain and IS logistics is that we should interdict their supply — and that should be able to be done very effectively by slower, heavily armed aircraft able to loiter on station much longer than, for example, hornets, which have a limited range, low ammunition carry capacity etc. 



If we isolate them from their supplies they have a big problem. You allude to an issue that has puzzled me i.e., why aren’t local forces loyal to their country, why don’t they stand and fight? 



I doubt a country is worth our help if it won’t help itself.



Zebra