Indonesia should lead diplomacy in Muslim world | The Jakarta PostThe new leadership of President Joko “Jokowi” Widodo has brought much talk of hope, including discussions on foreign policy, in particular diplomacy in the Muslim world.



Generally speaking, the first term of former president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono in 2004-2009 was seen as “outstanding”, while the second term was a “huge disappointment”, in the words of Australian journalist Peter Hartcher. Yudhoyono showed some energy in foreign policy during the first term but later this declined and instead he focused more on domestic issues or party politicking. 



Even when several international meetings were hosted in Indonesia, the role he played was more akin to that of a host rather than that of a leader.



During his first term, Yudhoyono seemed keen to play the role of bridging the West with the Muslim world. He tried to employ the two pronged approaches asserting the reality of Indonesia as the world’s largest Muslim majority country while also being a democracy. 



Indonesia appealed to the US and the West as an example of religious tolerance with a viable democracy. To that effect, Indonesia initiated some regional and international interfaith dialogues. Indonesia also sought to involve more and more countries in the “sharing” venue of experiences in the Bali Democracy Forum.



Nevertheless, not much has really been achieved. Both Yudhoyono and his foreign minister Marty Natalegawa seemed to wrestle more on the nation’s international image than actual foreign policy. 



This has to change. With Jokowi at the top and Retno LP Marsudi, a seasoned diplomat, as the minister, we have the right package for tangible, not just superficial, strength. Jokowi might lack diplomatic experience but Minister Retno exudes intellectual capability, confidence and commitment to achieving results and the ability to compromise while keeping her ideal-based decisiveness. 



These are rare traits among the top brass within the foreign ministry circle. 



Today, foreign policy is still undervalued. For one, foreign scholars have correctly noted that Indonesia has never had a grand strategy. Indonesian diplomats always cite our basis of foreign policy as “helping to create world peace”, quoting the Constitution. 



That is surely very broad and far from a down to earth strategy. As the country with the largest Muslim population, for instance, would Indonesia strive more for peace in the Middle East? Can Indonesia really speak in and for the Muslim world?



Being the country with the largest Muslim population has never been much of a card to play, though it has been useful rhetorically. 



The nation’s concrete role and influence are not commensurate with its size. In terms of realpolitik, there is something wrong here. 



The Jokowi leadership has to be honest. When you are big, act like you are big. Being big is definitely a viable currency of power to do something real. For too long elites have acted superfluously or even belittled the significance of Islam in foreign policy. 



Such elites are simply lucky that, policy-wise, the people are unaware of their power and fail to politically demand more. 



Yet Muslims, being an overwhelming majority, naturally deserve to be represented better, including in foreign policy. 



The ideal once sold by Yudho-yono, regarding Indonesia as the bridge between Islam and the West, is worth fleshing out. 



Today more than ever, there is a need for Indonesia to take an active role in the Muslim world and give greater attention to the Muslim world. At least two key reasons are obvious for such reassertion. 



First, the Muslim world is crumbling, a concern discussed in daily conversations, sermons, social and print media and other places among our 200-million plus Muslims. 



Dire conflicts and civil wars arise and are still ongoing in Syria, Palestine, Lebanon, Egypt, Libya, Yemen and others. The latest concern over the Islamic State movement has added more complexity to fragmented Middle East politics. Perhaps only Indonesia and a few other smaller Muslim countries are at peace or have no direct involvement in the areas of conflict. 



There is no easy solution here but a more powerful diplomacy is clearly in need. This is a call for Indonesia to answer.



Second, the Arab Spring started some years ago. Voices for political change are around, demanding more, not less, democracy. 



As the third largest democracy that is dominantly Muslim, Indonesia has a lot to offer in terms of experience. 



Even though Indonesia is still striving to find the right balance between democracy, Islam and modernity, it has by its own right merits to share. 



Indonesia can share its democratic transformation with the Tunisians, for example, who have shown positive strides to transform its new democracy. 



Indonesia’s engagement and diplomatic activity in the Middle East should not be confined to issues of migrant worker problems or the quota for the haj pilgrimage. 



A new era in foreign policy should be in place and is overdue. That means a stronger role must be adopted along with a clear strategy. 



It is already late but the new leadership has an opportunity. The state owes it to its 87 percent-Muslim population to take this responsibility. 



Doubts about the role of a female foreign minister to be effective in Middle East affairs should be proven minuscule, given the qualities of Minister Retno. 



Her vice minister, AM Fachir, is an experienced diplomat who knows how to deal with concerns in the Middle East.

[...] diplomatic activity in the Middle East should not be confined to [...] migrant worker problems or the quota for haj pilgrimage.

The writer, who obtained a Master’s degree in international studies from Griffith University, Australia, is preparing a book titled Speaking Islam from Indonesia.