Reinstating 'negara hukum': A new challenge (Part 1 of 2) | The ...The state of Indonesia shall be a state based on the Rule of Law. The 1945 Constitution, Article 1 (3).



On Aug. 17, 1945, Indonesia proclaimed its independence, and declared itself a state based on law or negara hukum, or in Dutch, the rechtsstaat. The following day, the 1945 Constitution (UUD 1945) was adopted. It is known for its brevity, comprising only 37 articles, four transitory provisions and one provision for amendment. For a newly independent state to have such a Constitution one day after its proclamation of independence was indeed an achievement. The state founders agreed the Constitution was far from perfect and therefore was to be regarded as temporary. 



In its early years, Indonesia went through many upheavals, and in 1949 the new Federal Republic of Indonesia was born. It lasted one year before the older unitary state of Indonesia came back into being, adopting the new 1950 Constitution. A general election was held in mid-1955 and resulted in the Constituent Assembly, which, among other things, was tasked with drafting a new constitution. Islamic parties insisted on an Islamic constitution aimed at establishing an Islamic state, while the nationalist-socialist and communist parties reiterated their preference to maintain a secular state. 



The contentious debate resulted in the Assembly’s failure to produce a new constitution. 



The regions, especially Sumatra, Sulawesi and Maluku, expressed discontent with the Assembly and the government, which it claimed had long ignored their interests, prioritizing Java. They declared themselves separate and in the face of disintegration, president Sukarno dissolved the Assembly and reinstated the 1945 Constitution. 



The 1945 Constitution was perceived as a unifying factor embracing all conflicting sides, but ideological disputes continued. President Sukarno, a strong and charismatic leader, managed to contain the disputes. However, Soeharto, who usurped power from Sukarno, did not tolerate the tension, stressing stability and order. Soeharto introduced an official interpretation of the Constitution through nationwide dissemination of the Pancasila state ideology, which included an official interpretation of the Constitution. 



Under Soeharto’s rule from 1965 to 1998, the Constitution was treated as a sacred document not to be amended or replaced. Any attempt to question or amend it was opposed, and those who refused to abide by it either ended up in prison or were exiled, including elder statesmen and retired generals grouped in the Petisi 50.



A state based on law has thus never existed in Indonesia, even though every Constitution stated that the state is based on law (rechtsstaat), and not merely on power (machsstaat). The negara hukum was interpreted differently from one government to another. Sukarno subjected the negara hukum to his “unfinished revolution”, while Soeharto treated it as a state based on laws favored by the state. 



When Soeharto’s rule collapsed, his vice president BJ Habibie constitutionally replaced him. Habibie initiated bold policies to restore public confidence. Habibie was ousted in the 1999 general election, but in his one year-term, he contributed greatly to the transition from an authoritarian state to a more open and democratic state. 



Among some 50 laws enacted between May 1998 and October 1999 were a few that laid the foundations for reinstating a law-based state, including the revised Law on Judicial Powers, the Law on Corruption Eradication, the Law on Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution, the law on clean governance, the law revoking the Subversive Act and a revision of crimes against the state. 



Ratifications of international human rights instruments included that of the convention against torture and the convention on forced labor. Under the shadow of an authoritarian government, an important step had been taken to uphold justice and the rule of law. 



Restoration of the law-based state reentered public debate. The fact that the laws were intentionally abandoned in the last 40 years became solid ground to bring back negara hukum into the domestic and international realm. 



Since 1998, the legislature has passed over 300 laws, regarding the formation of new regencies and provinces, to economic transactions, education, women and many others. Several important institutions like the Constitutional Court (MK), Judicial Commission (KY), Ombudsman, Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK) and others have been established. The judiciary, police and prosecutors have been forced to improve their organizational and professional capability.



Under Soeharto, the president himself was primadonna along with economic development. Starting from 1998, however, legal compliance became obligatory for every action and transaction by government or business. 



But as former MK chief justice Jimly Asshidiqie once stated, “[...] one must not forget about the dissemination of law and legal education, and law information management as supporting elements.”



The early years of reformasi saw the strengthening of checks and balances and more access to people’s participation. Other state auxiliary agencies included the General Elections Commission (KPU), the Financial Transaction Report and Analysis Centre (PPATK), the Witness and Victim Protection Agency (LPSK), the Press Council (Dewan Pers), the Broadcasting Commission (KPI), the National Commission on Human Rights (Komnas HAM) and many others.



But despite commitments to law enforcement, a mere 10 percent of the annual state budget was allocated to the Supreme Court, the Law and Human Rights Ministry, the Attorney General, the MK, KY, and the KPK — combined. There have been so many irregularities, overlapping rules and conflicts between laws and regulations. There have even been rivalries between law agencies. The challenge of the new government is to reinstate the negara hukum — the promise of the republic’s founders. 



One basic requirement is an independent and impartial judiciary, along with formal and substantial legality and recognition and protection of fundamental human rights. Significant changes since 1998 have led to a relatively strong judicial authority with guaranteed independence and impartiality. But while there is a constitutional guarantee of independence and impartiality, one can easily find the absence of both. 



There have been blatant violations of justice in so many police and attorney general investigations, in court proceedings, and in other executive actions, mostly against the poor and marginalized. Justice for all as a principle has no bearing at all.



 Those who are not well connected, including companies, have fallen victim to the judiciary’s arbitrary decisions. Society is concerned once again with the deterioration of the judiciary.



 Obviously, there have been reform measures in the judiciary at all levels, led by the Supreme Court (MA) and Judicial Commission. With a free press watching the judiciary, one would think that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary should no longer be an issue.



Yet the judiciary is still viewed as the weakest point in our constitutional architecture. Many verdicts still injure the public sense of justice. 



The arrest of then MK chief justice Akil Mochtar by the KPK for accepting bribes from various parties who were plaintiffs or defendants was just the tip of the iceberg. The reputation of the entire judiciary went down with Akil. 





The writer is chairman of the Indonesian Advocates Union (Ikadin). This is an abridged version of a presentation at the Melbourne University school of law on Oct. 8, 2014.