Discourse: Iraq restricts visas for Indonesians over fear they may join ...Local authorities have estimated that dozens of Indonesians have recently traveled to Iraq and Syria to support the Islamic State movement (IS), which has gained an infamous reputation and has seized some territory in the two states. The Jakarta Post’s Hasyim Widhiarto recently interviewed Iraqi Ambassador to Indonesia Abdullah Hasan Salih to discuss what the Iraqi people need from other states, including Indonesia, to help their ongoing fight against IS, and to support the country’s future development.

Question: Can you describe the recent situation in Iraq, particularly in relation to IS’ activities?



Answer: IS has dominated parts of the Sunni provinces, but Kurdish areas are still stable as many countries, especially European countries, have been coming in with help. The southern part of Iraq, where many oil fields are located, is also stable and secure. Our national army is also currently trying to liberate areas captured by IS. 



In order to find a solution, we have to confess that there is now a problem in Iraq. We have a new president-elect, a new parliamentary speaker-elect and the formation of the new government is set to be announced in one or two days. After that, I think all the people will be keen to see the government’s measures to solving the problem in those unsettled parts of Iraq. 



Local authorities in Iraq have claimed that dozens of Indonesians have joined IS. Are you aware of this?



To the best of our knowledge, either 52 or 53 Indonesians have traveled there [to join IS]. When I was in a meeting with [Indonesia’s] deputy foreign minister, I told him that I could say only two things about Indonesians going there. First, there’s a risk they may not return home and second, it is not secure for them to go there. 



I recently delivered a speech at the Istiqlal Mosque [in Jakarta] telling those present, especially the young, that they are not involved in the [IS] struggle. 



They need to get as far away as possible from the place.



You have your moderate version of Islam, which we respect. I myself want Indonesia to remain stable. You are not supposed to be there [in Iraq] and indulge in the Islamic sectarian conflict. I myself, as a Sunni, did not know what IS was until now. We used to consider it part of al-Qaeda, but now its militants often criticize and attack al-Qaeda, so we are less clear about it. 



How can the Indonesian people help the Iraqis fight against IS?



There are problems in my country and I will not deny that. As a witness [to the conflict], however, I strongly advise Indonesian people, especially the young people who have learned about the conflict from the media, not to go [to Iraq] because of the security risks in the country, especially in the Sunni provinces. I want this message to reach not only high-ranking officials in Indonesia but also ordinary people who feel involved with the current situation in Iraq. 



There are some possible solutions and ongoing negotiations. The Iraqis are fully capable and self-sufficient enough to either struggle on or solve their problems. We are capable of resolving this [conflict] without any Indonesians sacrificing themselves. I think Iraqis are mature, well-equipped, and experienced enough to resolve the conflict.



But please, try helping us, not by supporting one party’s fight against another. If you do that, you will destroy my country. I want everyone who loves Iraq to help us as a whole community. Do not separate us. Do not part us. 



Do you think the Indonesian government has been helpful? 



The government has many measures but it has not been able to prevent anyone from coming [to Iraq] or traveling to another country. With regards to the IS problem, there is some cooperation between the two governments. I myself, for example, would not grant any visa [to Indonesians] unless they were engineers working for a company in Iraq or trusted individuals, like experts or university professors. We will not issue visas to casual visitors. 



You have given your assurances that the Iraqis are capable of dealing with IS. What is your government’s strategy to contain the group’s activities?



You know that our government is currently being formed and it also consists of different political parties. We are not admired for our previous government’s strategy [in containing IS] as it has left the country in the current situation. 



Iraq is just like Indonesia, where diversity has become the basis for the nation’s unity. Iraq has many different communities, including Arabs, Kurds, Turks, Persians, Muslims, Christians and Jews. We hope that our new government can offer a new strategy for the whole country to eradicate our two biggest enemies, terrorism and corruption, so that we can start rebuilding our country. 



What is your opinion of the bilateral relationship between Iraq and Indonesia? 



Many Iraqis look at Indonesia as a very friendly country. Indonesians, meanwhile, can also invest in many things [in Iraq], especially in the oil and agricultural sectors. But, many of them are hesitant to do so. Some politicians, like House of Representatives Speaker Marzuki Alie, have told me that the Middle East is still an unstable region. I told him, however, that I would guarantee [the safety of] Indonesian engineers or workers if they work at oil fields in the southern part of our country, which is still stable and secure. 



How difficult is it for Iraqi citizens to visit Indonesia? 



It is not easy, especially at this time. The Indonesian embassy considers everyone who wants to come to Indonesia as trying to escape [from the ongoing conflict]. Meanwhile, I personally will not grant visas [to Indonesians], except for high-ranking officials, because I am afraid that any others may become involved in the struggle in Iraq.