Police: Group aims to make RI an Islamic state by force | The Jakarta ...During interrogation, a recently arrested terrorism suspect said his group was aiming to build an Islamic country through military force, National Police spokesman Insp. Gen. Edward Aritonang said Thursday.

Edward said the statement was obtained from Ubaid, one of the terrorist suspects arrested in Aceh and now in police custody. Ubaid said the military training facility had been established to provide human resources to transform Indonesia into an Islamic state by military force, he said.

“Ubaid has admitted that the [group’s] strategy was different to the bombs used by [the late] Noordin M. Top and [the late] Dr. Azahari Husein.”

Ubaid’s testimony also showed that the terrorist’s grand plan was to make Aceh part of the Qoidah Aminah, meaning it would serve as a base to launch attacks on those working to prevent the group from turning Indonesia into an Islamic state, Edward said.

To date, police have killed seven suspected terrorists, detained 33 and are pursuing 31 others. The police had managed to confiscate 14 firearms, eight hand guns and more than 12,000 rounds of ammunition for various weapons, two notebook computers and one satellite cell phone.

Edward said the suspected terrorist group had surveyed offices in Banda Aceh that belonged 

to the United Nations, foreign organizations, the military and the police.

He added that a potential threat may come from a small group led by Saptono. Saptono is the brother of Jaja, who was shot dead during a recent police raid in Leupung, Aceh.

“Saptono managed to escape [arrest] in Jantho because he was not present during the raid.”

The suspected terrorist cell in Aceh that had established a military-style training camp in a forest was allegedly linked to a larger organization with members in other regions including Java.

The intensified crackdown suspected terrorists began in late February and resulted in the death of terrorist suspect Dulmatin, who was at the top of the police’s most-wanted list. The police shot him dead during a raid in Pamulang, Banten.

The death of Dulmatin left terrorist suspect Umar Patek at the top of the list. Observers say the police should focus not only on Umar but also possible new figures.

Also on Thursday, Indonesia’s Customs and Excise Office reported to have seized 60 tons of illegal explosives on a boat.

Office spokesman Evy Suharyanto said the Riau Islands customs office had confiscated the boat 

carrying the explosives. The boat was travelling from Malaysia to 

Sulawesi.

“Two people by the names of Subur and La Ruwa were named suspects in the case. They are accused of transporting illegal materials into the country,” he said.

When asked whether the explosives were related to the recent suspected terrorist activities, Evy said he would leave the investigations to the police.

Commenting on this, National Police spokesman Insp. Gen. Edward Aritonang said a group of police officers had been deployed to investigate a possible link.