Religious Affairs Minister aims to raise Indonesian Muslims ...The Religious Affairs Ministry held on Saturday a seminar to raise people's awareness about Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or ISIS) movement in the country, inviting around 280 representatives from various Islamic mass organizations in Indonesia to attend.

 

 "We need to always be ready to anticipate such a movement. It is our duty to always warn the public [all Indonesian Muslims] and to provide a thorough understanding for them," Religious Affairs Minister Lukman Hakim Syaifuddin said on the sidelines of the seminar on Saturday.

 

 "Not only to spread information, the meeting also aims to provide a better understanding on the latest development of this radical movement," Lukman added. "So, here, we can express our perceptions [on ISIL] in order to prevent it [from spreading] by raising people's awareness."

 

 The government recently announced a ban on support for ISIL movement, saying the group's beliefs posed a serious threat to the state ideology of Pancasila, as well as to the nation's cultural and religious diversity. He warned citizens not to join the rebel group’s fight in Syria and Iraq.

 

 The announcement was made following a meeting at the State Palace led by President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono that  produced several strategies for curbing domestic support for ISIL, one of which included the creation of a campaign organized by the Religious Affairs Ministry in cooperation with several religious figures to raise public awareness of the perils of ISIL.

 

 Leaders of the country’s two largest Islamic organizations -- Nahdlatul Ulama (NU) and Muhammadiyah, which have decried growing local support for ISIL as running  counter to Islam -- also expressed their views during the seminar.

 

 Din Syamsuddin, a Muhammadiyah leader who represented the Indonesian Ulema Council (MUI) during the seminar, said the country indeed needed "a joint movement by the government and all elements of the public to counter it."

 

 The government has also ordered a ban on YouTube videos endorsing ISIL, while Yudhoyono has called on citizens to carefully examine conflicts in the Middle East, including those involving ISIL, noting that “not all problems in the Middle East concern religion”.

 

 As many as 56 Indonesians have become ISIL fighters in Syria and Iraq, of which three have already died.

 

 The National Counterterrorism Agency (BNPT) has also issued a warning stating that any Indonesian citizen joining ISIL, which has been internationally deemed a terrorist group, could have their citizenship revoked.