Islamic financial institutions urged to be innovative to attract ...The chairman of the Financial Services Authority (OJK) board of commissioners, Muliaman D. Hadad, has urged Islamic financial institutions to enhance innovations regarding products and services to attract customers.



Muliaman said Islamic financial institutions should create genuine sharia products that bring out the uniqueness of sharia principles and that are able to meet the real demands of customers.



“In addition, the service level of excellence of Islamic financial institutions should also be on a par with best practices in the market,” said Muliaman in his opening address at the OJK’s International Conference on Islamic Finance in Surabaya yesterday.



The conference was themed “An Integrated Development of Islamic Finance toward Financial Stability and Sustainable Economic Development” 



Muliaman was exploring strategies to accelerate the development of Islamic finance, both at a domestic level and global level, in response to the low market share of Islamic finance.



The global market share of Islamic finance is only 0.8 percent of the total market, meaning the influence of Islamic finance on the global financial markets is relatively insignificant.



“In a highly competitive market, such as the financial market, Islamic financial institutions and Islamic financial instruments cannot depend on regular standard products to attract customers,” he said, referring to the strategies. 



Muliaman added that each product development needed to be supported by intensive dissemination of information and education to improve public awareness and willingness to use Islamic financial products. 



Apart from that, the development of Islamic finance needs to be supported by an adequate legal framework. “As we are already aware that sharia-based products are, by nature, different from their conventional counterparts. Hence, it requires a legal framework that corresponds to Sharia principles,” he remarked.



According to him, the existing laws and regulations governing sharia are not sufficient to support the development of Islamic finance and, thus, need to be improved to cater to the rapid growth of Islamic finance. 



“It is particularly important for the development of Islamic financial institutions and for creating a more conducive environment that enables sharia transactions to grow efficiently.” 



Collaborative efforts



The development of Islamic finance needs more collaborative and concerted efforts, according to him. “The development of Islamic finance is the responsibility of all related parties, not only the financial services authority, the central bank and the government. Rather, it is the responsibility of policy-making institutions, the industry, as well as research and education foundations.”



“There is an urgent need for a national forum for coordination and collaboration among the major policy institutions and those related parties to encourage the growth of Islamic finance and to lead the development of Islamic finance toward a more integrated manner, which adopts international best practices. This, we hope, could be established in the near future, in Indonesia, as well as in other parts of the world.



He cited the launch of the Islamic economic blueprint for East Java province working together with other authorities, such as the OJK and Bank Indonesia, as an example of collaboration among stakeholders in supporting the development of Islamic finance.



“This effort could be followed by other provinces within Indonesia and also in other countries. Such examples could be seen also in supporting the development of wider Islamic banking in Indonesia by coordinating with other authorities such as the State-Owned Enterprises Ministry or the Finance Ministry.” 



“Besides that, the more integrated and collaborative development of Islamic finance in Indonesia should contribute more to increasing the economic wealth of society since the majority population of Indonesia is Muslim, and should also contribute more to financial inclusion such as the development of micro takaful programs and retail corporate sukuk. It also could fulfill the needs of an increasing number of middle-income members of society as well as the needs of the country’s infrastructure financing.”



“We believe these things could be done better when there’s integrated development of Islamic finance in the country,” he said. (JP)