HYDERABAD: The city is expected to have its first gay pride march this year. The event is slated to be held by the end of 2012 with the cooperation of various LGBTQI (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer and Intersex) groups working out of Hyderabad. While deliberations on the same are on, organisers of the event say that they have various security aspects to look into. The announcement has come at a time when various sexual minority communities are holding programmes to celebrate the country's gay rights month, July.

While other cities including Chennai, Mumbai, Delhi and Calcutta have been holding pride marches over the last couple of years, it was never organised in the city. Now, with at least two organisations including Wajood and Suraksha taking up the project a pride is possible with some planning and mobilisation, the organisers said. "There are several aspects to look into while holding a pride parade like that of security. In cities like Bangalore the pride is held with police protection. Even in Hyderabad, we will need good security to prevent attacks," said Jayathi Mathur, from Wajood in a media interaction held in the US Consultate here on Monday.

As a first step towards a show of solidarity within the community and outside, Wajood in association with US Consulate will hold a film festival in the city on July 27 at Annapurna studios, Banjara Hills. Four films dealing with various issues of the queer community will be screened as part of the festival called Rainbow Film Festival. This will be followed by various other events like a legal workshop which deals with legislation protecting the community. "We are thinking of strengthening the community in the city. It is not just about helping people to come out of the closet as every individual needs help from the community to not lose faith in himself or herself. Especially when the family starts threatening to slap legal cases, it becomes difficult for individuals to remain strong and this is where we would like to help," said Mathur.

The group which mainly comprises people from the community who are working in various corporate offices in the city are also planning an office sensitisation programme.

In the pride parade which is being planned, people from LGBTQI communities from other cities are also expected to participate. "The battle is against stereotypes about the community. We are also looking at programmes for people from all sections of the society. One plan is to get groups of non queer people to pledge solidarity with the community," said Vishal, a member of Wajood. The US consulate officials said that the Rainbow Film Festival is aimed at helping people to realise that gay rights is a global issue. "We had held a mock court in Nalsar where law students argued in favour of gay marriage rights. We think that the young people of today are ready to act on the issue of gay rights. There is no need to wait for the consent of a hetero normative society to popularise and work for gay rights," said Elizabeth Jones, assistant public affairs officer, US Consulate.