City celebrities react to the SC ruling on same sex relationships.While the world was busy making plans to spend 11.12.13 in a special way, the fate of the homosexuals in India was being decided behind the closed doors of the Supreme Court. On his last day as a Supreme Court judge, Justice Singhvi chose to throw out a 2009 ruling by the Delhi High Court that had decriminalized gay sex. The decision received some stern reactions from the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender) community in Chennai.The protest began with the social networking sites abuzz with messages trashing the verdict. Actress Khushbu — speaking to Chennai Times — said, "It is a very regressive and oppressive decision. With such a judgment, we are denying dignity and a respectful life to the members of this community. This is will not only prevent gay people from coming out but will also tag and push them in a corner." Calling it 'shameful', she quipped that 'it is sad that now Supreme Court will decide who you spend your life with.' The protest echoed in Hollywood , too. American actress and humanitarian, Mia Farrow , tweeted, "Very dark day for freedom and human rights as Indian Supreme Court rules to criminalize homosexuality," The Rosemary's Baby star went on to write, "Well-when I have a wife-we won't be going to India."For fashion choreographer Karun Raman, the decision is nothing less than draconian. "I don't know what to say! So now the court will decide who one should fall in love with? This is cruel and this is going to instigate more suicides. Because once you outlaw love, it is immensely hurtful," said a devastated Karun. In a voice choked with emotion, fashion designer and gay rights activist Sunil Menon conversed with Chennai Times over the phone. "We had thought today, 11.12.13, would be a day to remember, but now we'll remember this as a black day for the LGBT community. How can you criminalize one's sexual orientation," he questioned. "It boggles the mind as to what prompted this judgment. We are the largest democracy, we offer asylum to refugees from other countries, we are seen as a supremely tolerant country, and yet we have the highest court in the land delivering such a regressive judgment," he added.Apart from celebrities, the judgment has garnered strong protest from organizations fighting for the cause. Vikranth Prasanna, founder of Chennai Dost, one such organization, said, "We are shocked. We had great faith in the apex judiciary body of the country and hoped that the verdict will be in our favour. But this is not only against us, but it is against democracy." The decision has ignited debates again, with organizations coming together to put up a fight. "When I came out to my parents, I told them that there is nothing to worry about since we thought it will be legalized in India. But this decision turned the tables. But there will be a revolution and we will fight back. This is just the beginning," said an optimistic Rupesh Reddy, boyfriend of Prasanna.Giving a piece of his mind to Justice Singhvi, Sunil quipped, "Had the SC delivered a more progressive judgment, I am sure at least 18 former colonies of Britain, who still have the archaic law, would have taken the cue from us, and followed suit. We blew that chance."Theatre actor Karthik Kumar signs off saying, "As an artist, I will definitely voice my opinion through my work. If I am producing something in the coming six months, I will take it up, most probably in the form of a stand-up comedy act."My dear friends from the LGBT community, the next time anybody speaks to you about how great India is, take a selfie of you slapping them.Second 377 its frightening how someone else decides how when and who you should love -basically freedom of choice isn't legal anymore :(: The LGBT community should not be disheartened. Keep up the fight for your rightsBeg your pardon Supreme Court of India, but criminalising homosexuality doesn't seem like justice upheld#377 a minor ripping a girls guts out is not as "unnatural" an offence as homosexuality.... Bravo sc... U just dragged us back 200 years.