NEW DELHI: Religions leaders welcomed the Supreme Court judgment setting aside the Delhi high court's order which had decriminalized homosexuality.Speaking to TOI, Archbishop of Delhi Anil J T Couto said, "The church does not condone same sex marriages."Father Dominic Emmanuel, spokesperson of Catholic Archdiocese, said, "The church is against treating homosexuals as criminals. De-criminalizing homosexuality does not mean legalizing same sex marriages. The Catholic church respects people with different orientation, but does not accept same sex marriage as it is against god's plan. Sex is meant for procreation and taking forward creation."Dr S Q R Ilyas, working committee member of the All India Muslim Personal Law Board which was also a petitioner opposing homosexuality, called it a pretext to import alien and western culture and lifestyle in India. He appealed to political leaders and legislators to ensure that such a law was not approved in Parliament.The Utkal Christian Council is one of the petitioners in SC that opposed decriminalizing homosexuality. "Sex between people of the same gender has been illegal in India since the 1860s, when a British colonial law classified it as against the order of nature and social values. Legalization of same sex marriage and sex between homosexuals would lead to social disorder and health hazards," said Bibhu Dutta Das, legal advisor of UCC.Muslim clerics said the SC's verdict was good and should be implemented. Shahi Imam of Delhi's Jama Masjid Ahmad Bukhari called homosexuality a disease. "Homosexuality is an import of Europe and when they couldn't handle it, they sent it here. In Islam, sexual relationship with an adult/minor of the same gender is haraam (prohibited)," he said.Abdul Qasim Nomani, rector of Darul Uloom Deoband, said, "Anal sex is strictly prohibited even if it is between a man and a woman. Being gay or a lesbian is a crime and the Supreme Court judgment is appropriate and for the betterment of mankind."Zafaryab Jilani, member of All India Muslim Personal Law Board, believes the SC verdict will help keep India's culture intact. "This has been done to respect all religions," he said.Welcoming the verdict, yoga guru Ramdev said, "I invite all homosexual brothers and sisters to come to Patanjali Yogapeeth where they will be housed in separate rooms and taught yoga morning and evening. Homosexuality is just a bad habit that's hard to get rid of but not impossible."He said homosexuality belonged to the domain of "animal rights" and not human rights. "Today, you are talking about males with males and women with women. Tomorrow, you'll talk about animals, too. Also, gay rights is not an issue at all. What contribution have gays made in history?"