NEW DELHI: "Aap ko kisi se darne ki zaroorat nahi hai (You don't have to be scared of anybody)," said Rani Sharma while addressing a huge gathering at Jantar Mantar on Sunday. Rani, in her late 70s, called herself progressive and open to change. That is why she could accept her grandson's alternative sexuality without hesitation. She, in fact, convinced everyone in the family to respect his choice."It is important to accept change. Who are we to tell these kids whom to love? It is a natural feeling, and like other people, these kids should be able to live their life without fear,'' said Rani, who was upset with the recent Supreme Court judgment which re-criminalizes homosexuality. She felt it would discourage people from coming out in the open. According to gay rights activists, the 2009 Delhi high court verdict had encouraged many people to come out of the closet. At least, they opened up to their families. And the families too were ready to accept their decision as the law of the land didn't consider it to be a criminal offence."After the recent order, theoretically, our children will be considered criminals. I don't like this. What kind of a world are we living in? The Delhi high court order had provided a ray of hope to many families. The SC is known for judicial activism, but this is a regressive step. They are knowingly dismissing the rights of this community,'' said filmmaker Chitra Palekar, one of the petitioners and whose daughter is a lesbian.As protests rage worldwide over the Supreme Court judgment, families of those belonging to the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender) community want the judiciary and politicians to realize that such orders will only serve to alienate the community further."They should be open to change. They say this a minority community. But minorities too have rights in this country. The order is against their basic human rights,'' said Asha, whose nephew is a gay.The 2009 judgment had changed a lot for the community. It gave many members the strength to tell their families about their sexual preferences. Rahul (name changed), a 32-year-old businessman, came out to his family after HC decriminalized gay relations. "I was initially scared that they will snap ties. The fear of losing my family kept me from sharing this important fact. After the HC order, I felt a little confident that they will understand me. It came as a rude shock to them, but they were able to come to terms with it. The decriminalization played a key role in changing their views. Though I have not told anybody outside my immediate family, I feel happy that my family has no issues with it,'' said Rahul, who had come with his sister.Families fear that the SC order will once again start harassment of the LGBT community by police and those against them. "It will be misused. Why should these kids pay a price for short-sightedness of a few individuals,'' said Rhea, whose brother is a gay.