A day after AAP released its manifesto, the party took to Twitter to spell its stand on several issues ranging from decriminalization of gay sex to nuclear policy.

Decriminalization of gay sex by repealing section 377 of IPC, bringing more women officers in police force and "zero tolerance" towards crimes against women are some of the promises made by Aam Aadmi Party.

Battling corruption, decentralizing governance and an increase in the minimum size of houses for citizens were top priority for Aam Aadmi Party's Mumbai manifesto, which advocates the passing of the Jan Lokpal Bill for Maharashtra, involving the creation of an anti-corruption ombudsman for the state.

Supreme Court today agreed to hear in open court a curative petition of gay rights activists for decriminalizing gay sex. The plea will be taken up next week.

The health minister's statement comes after RSS spokesman Ram Madhav, who has now joined BJP as general secretary, made a pitch for gay rights.

In a major blow to gay rights in the world's largest democracy, the Supreme Court on Wednesday threw out a 2009 ruling by a lower court that had decriminalized gay sex. The apex court stated that only Parliament could change the law.

"My first feeling was deep sadness about the LGBT community … I was disappointed," Justice AP Shah said in an interview to a TV channel on Sunday.

The special mobile squad of Kasaragod police arrested a sub inspector of police on the charge of sexually abusing a dalit woman. According to police, they arrested Sugunan, the grade SI at Adoor police station, on the basis of the complaint by a dalit woman that he sexually abused her and made her pregnant. Sugunan was later produced in the local court in Kasaragod, which sent him in judicial remand till November 25.

About a fortnight after a 34-year-old teacher was booked for allegedly sexually abusing a minor boy of Sham Nagar area following the efforts of Bachpan Bachao Andolan, an NGO of Noble Peace Prize Winner Kailash Satyarthi , police is yet to arrest the accused in the case.

Social service unit of crime branch has on Monday arrested Vishal Jaiswal after raiding a Duplex bungalow at Sahu Nagar on Besa Road where the culprit allegedly has been engaged in operating a sex trade racket. A victim girl, native of Gwalior, has been also rescued during the raid. Time for The Big Reset. Decode Budget 2014 with the best experts on ET NOW. 7am onwards on 10th July

P {margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0;} Social service wing of crime branch swooped down on the fourth floor of an apartment in Ganeshpeth on Saturday busting a sex racket. Apart from arresting a couple for operating the racket, police team has also rescued two girls who were forced to work for the material gain of the culprits.

Peoples' Union for Civil Liberties has filed a complaint with the Karnataka State Human Rights Commission, on behalf of sex workers who are being subjected to police violence in Majestic, Upparpete KG Road and adjoining areas in Bangalore.

The principal district and session judge Mohan Sripad Sankolli on Friday asked the officials of the health and family welfare to conduct raids like Lokayukta police to curb sex determination tests