The appendix is a useless organ lodged in the human body, one that we inherited from a more primitive form of man, a vestige of human evolution. Every time it explodes into a full-blow case of appendicitis, we snip it out.

Homophobia is bit like that for society, a vestige of a colonial past for countries like India and Uganda, and a Stalinist era for the likes of Russia, which, every once in a while explodes onto the national arena, forcing countries to repeal regressive laws.

India came a step closer to dealing with its appendix when the apex court passed a landmark order last week providing constitutional rights to the third gender, allowing transgender individuals the right to marry, inherit property, divorce and adopt children.

The court spoke of the moral failure that lay in the unwillingness of society to embrace alternate sexualities.

As transgender individuals were neither male nor female, the court felt that treating them as such would be a denial of their constitutional rights.

The judgment comes seven years too late for a young athlete called Santhi who was stripped off a medal at the 2006 Asian Games for failing a gender test by the Olympic Council of Asia. The incident drove her to attempt suicide. She was later found working as a labourer in a brick kiln in Tamil Nadu. A Supreme Court order such as this, which provides legitimacy to a third gender, could have helped the Indian authorities fight stigma in international sports associations for which all athletes must either belong to ‘gender no 1′ or ‘gender no 2′.

The new judgment brings India on par with Germany, the first country in Europe to give parents the option of a third gender on birth certificates.

Yet India’s stand on alternate sexualities is a trifle confusing. While this week’s court order was a milestone for civil rights, it comes in the wake of a spectacularly regressive order passed by another bench of the same court which upheld an archaic colonial law criminalizing homosexuality, or, to be more specific, “all acts against the order of nature.” In other words, India bestows constitutional rights to the third gender but punishes homosexual acts with a life sentence.

Ironically, Russia, a country that’s far less plural and far more regressive on gay rights than India, repealed Stalin’s anti-sodomy law in 1993 — a law that had once banned consensual sex between two men. And yet, Russia, the host of the 2014 winter Olympics, came in for much flak over a new law banning the spread of “gay propaganda” through media or any event that acknowledges gay people exist.

In other words, Russia, a country that has repealed its “anti-sodomy” law and legitimizes the existence of homosexuals, has banned pride marches, whereas India allows pride marches but has upheld a law criminalizing homosexuality. This has led to a legally absurd situation, where homosexuality is a crime punishable with life imprisonment in India, but those involved in pride marches are not immediately arrested for confessing to the ‘crime.’ This could well be a case of a more progressive society rendering a regressive law legally untenable.

India’s contradictory views on gay rights could well be part of a global phenomenon where progressive strands of civil society world-over find themselves grappling with homophobia as countries across the globe collectively work towards coming out of the closet.

India’s LGBT community points to a historic acceptance of alternate sexualities in the country before colonization, attributing a bias against homosexuality to Victorian mores transported to India during colonial rule. While it has often been pointed out that our former colonial masters repealed their own laws against homosexuality in 1967, it might be worth noting that gay marriage was legalized in Britain only a month ago. So it took Britain a full 47 years to go from being a country that tolerated the existence of the LGBT community to one that gave them full citizenship rights.

While Britain may now be one of the world’s most gay-friendly countries, it was once a place that severely punished, tortured and executed gays. Oscar Wilde, whose writings are routinely trotted out at high-school elocution competitions across Britain and her colonies, was sentenced to two years imprisonment and hard labour in 1895 for being gay. The last known execution of homosexuals in Britain has been traced to 1836.

Victorian Britain may have found an echo in modern-day Iran. In 2007, Iranian leader Mohsen Yahyavi told British MPs that homosexuals deserve to be tortured and hanged (I will live with appendicitis, never mind if it kills me) while Iran’s former president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said his country did not have any homosexuals (I don’t have appendicitis because I can’t see my appendix).

There may still be hope for Iran. World over, institutions that once clamped down on alternate sexualities have now dramatically changed their stance. After regarding homosexuality a sin for several centuries, the Roman Catholic Church is in the process of altering its views under Pope Francis, who was widely applauded for saying, “If someone is gay and is sincerely seeking God who am I to judge?”

While the Vatican trims its list of sins, psychiatry trims its mental disorders. Homosexuality has long been dropped from the list of disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual brought out by the American Psychiatric Association.