The Goa government on Tuesday tendered the first phase of the construction of a new bus stand at Mapusa on 20,000 square metres of land on the southern side and adjacent to the existing KTC bus stand. The first phase, which includes construction of a retaining wall around the acquired land and filling it up because it is low-lying, is estimated to cost Rs 1.32-crore. The first phase is to be completed in six months.

The health minister's statement comes after RSS spokesman Ram Madhav, who has now joined BJP as general secretary, made a pitch for gay rights.

The BJP leader M Venkaig Naidu said his party would not align with any party in Andhra Pradesh. His clarification came in the back drop of the speculations that the BJP might have a truck with TDP.

The Kolhapur Municipal Corporation is going to write to district collectorate to confiscate the bank guarantee of Rs 25 crore submitted by Ideal Road Builders (IRB) to complete the pending works.

The Nagpur Municipal Corporation's (NMC) standing committee chairman Narendra Borkar has organized meeting on August 14 to discuss and take decision on 30 proposals including 14 related to tar road works. Some proposals are to give nod for starting the tendering process while other for issuing work orders to private contractors for executing the works. You dont have to live with pain. Call VARDAN for a Functional Manual Therapy appointment on 09910955500. Centres in Delhi and Gurgaon.

Dakshina Kannada Zilla Panchayat at its third special general meeting elected unopposed members and chairpersons of its five standing committees on Saturday.

The standing committee of Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) will take a call for tie up with private petrol pumps.

The weekly meeting of Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation(PCMC) 's standing committee was adjourned till 11 am on Thursday after paying tributes to the BJP leader Gopinath Munde who died in a car accident at Delhi.

At the end of first round in Dharmapuri constituency in Tamil Nadu, Pattali Makkal Katchi candidate Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss got 33112, AIADMK got 17475, DMK - 6725. With this, Anbumani ahead of 15637 than any other rivals.

The January 2014 orders states: "The government exempts IT/ITes/animation/gaming/computer graphics/telecom/BPO/KPO/other knowledge based industries from the applicability of Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act of 1946 for a period of five years."

Karnataka has extended the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act of 1946 otherwise called industrial standing orders for five more years benefitting IT/ITes firms.

In the elections held on Friday, Shiv Sena's Phanse defeated his Congress-NCP combine candidate Bhomsingh Rathod by 15-8 votes to become the standing committee chairman. Out of 22 standing committee members, MNS (3), Congress (1) and SP (1) members were absent during the voting Romedy NOW premieres Friends With Better Lives, an all new TV Series from the writer of FRIENDS. Watch the most anticipated International TV Series every Tuesday at 11pm only on Romedy NOW. FWBLRomedy