KOLKATA: Like all other parents, Pramatha Nath and Vijaylakshmi Ray Chaudhuri expected their only child, son Anis, to 'settle down' in life. But when he told them that he was gay, not only did they not berate him and take him to doctors, psychiatrists and godmen like many other Indian parents are wont to, they went all the way to the highest court of the land to support his choice.The elderly couple is, today, as angry, disappointed and helpless as the millions from the country's LGBT community who feel totally let down by the recent Supreme Court order on Article 377. The duo was among 19 parents of members of the LGBT community from across the country who were petitioners in favour of upholding the 2009 Delhi High Court order scrapping Article 377 that criminalizes homosexuality.Pramatha Nath and Vijaylakshmi, both ex-teachers, are worried about their son. "I'm very old now and what disappoints me is that I won't probably be alive to see my son live life on his own terms," Vijaylakshmi, 79, told TOI. She is worried that he son may be harassed and insulted.Anis disclosed his sexual orientation to his mother when he was 31. Instead of the backlash that he feared, he received unconditional acceptance. In fact, says Anis, he continues to be astonished by his mother's attitude. He recounts an incident a few years ago when his mother was scheduled to undergo an eye surgery. The date clashed with an important meeting on LGBT health issues in Delhi. "I was about to cancel my trip but Maa would have none of it. She said that the meeting was important for a greater cause and she would be just fine," said the proud son. His friends took care of his mother, in his absence.The elderly couple is clear that their support for their son, and for LGBT rights, is unconditional. "The tales I heard about the children being beaten up, driven out of their homes, harassed and ostracized broke my heart. I could never do that to my only son. If parents don't understand their children and support their genuine and just choices, who else will?" asks Vijaylakshmi.Anis, 42, is one of the faces of Kolkata's LGBT movement and a successful businessman. He lives with his partner of four years at Santoshpur and has a pet dog that he calls his 'daughter'. Sitting in his two bedroom apartment, Anis recounts at length his growing up as a person with a different sexual orientation in the small provincial town of Chandernagore. "There was an unspoken 'blanket ban' on anything related to sex or sexuality; discussing same sex orientation was out of the question," he told TOI. He realized that he was different from his peers during his early teens. Unable to voice his concerns or ask for help, he turned to books. "I read up all I could find on the topic - from medical journals to Indian epics and the Vedas to popular literature - to find out why was I different," he adds. His attempts at seeking validation received a boost when, in course of his readings, he found out that the American Psychiatrist Association had removed homosexuality from their list of mental disorders and accepted it as a natural occurrence. "I was about 19 years old and it came as such a relief to find out that I was not a'freak' of any sort," he adds excitedly, his euphoria evident in his smile.Over the years, Anis has located and connected with several others like him in and around the city. The internet greatly helped him in his endeavor. "But this is just not enough. The Supreme Court's judgment sets us back by miles," he says, the displeasure evident in his voice.