NEW DELHI: With the gay community taking small steps out of the closet, the city took a giant leap of pride on Sunday.As a group of some 600-700 homosexual men, lesbians and transgender people marched the streets of central Delhi, cheering diversity and shouting slogans against section 377 of the IPC, a decent number of city people turned out to walk with and celebrate the community which has long been at the receiving end of the law as well as social scorn in this country.There was no active hostility in the heart of the Capital as a rainbow group of gay activists, NGO workers, expat professionals, foreign tourists, eunuchs and ordinary people joined a 2.5 km march from the Barakhamba Road to Jantar Mantar. Demanding equal treatment and basic rights, India's first national gay pride parade ended with a tribute to the victims of section 377, a colonial-era provision in Indian law that prohibits "carnal intercourse against the order of nature"."We exist. We must be accepted as we are. This march is a huge step by the community to show that we are confident of ourselves and we must be respected," said Lesley Esteves, 32, a gay rights activist. "It is time for authorities to stop treating gay people like criminals," she said, before leading a band of people, shouting slogans against section 377.It was not the first time that the gay community has gathered in the city to protest against social discrimination, but it was the first time that they came out in the form of a pride parade."This is a huge change. It shows that we have grown as a community. It also shows that the attitude towards the gays have changed," said Gautam Bhan, one of the key organisers of the march. "Today, I am proud to be a resident of Delhi. We never expected this kind of support. It shows that Delhi wants to be a city that is free, open and tolerant."Though a few faces were hidden behind colourful masks, a large number of gays walked the street, holding hands, hugging their friends and partners and talking about the problems faced by the community. "I came here to just watch the parade and realised that the gay people were just like us. This parade has really shattered the stereotypical image that we impose on them," said Anand, a techie from Gurgaon.In fact, it was this image that the organisers tried to change with their march. And if the mood at the end of the one-and-a-half hour long walk was any indication, their effort of engaging society was a huge success. "I could not imagine this kind of response 10 years ago. This march is a message to the political class of the country to give legitimacy to the community," said well-known gay rights activist Ashok Row Kavi.