NEW DELHI: Juam and Mauro, a gay couple from Spain, are cradling two bundles of joy in their arms, holding them close to their chest. They feed the babies every three hours and look every inch the proud parents they are. The two got married last year and are now all set to enjoy parenthood thanks to assisted reproductive technique (ART) used at a fertility centre in the capital. One of the partners gave his sperm which was fertilized artificially with donor eggs and then put in a surrogate mother who delivered the twins recently.Dr Anoop Gupta, who owns Delhi IVF Fertility Research Centre where the twins were born, said that many gay couples are opting for surrogacy these days. "At least five such couples have got children using ART technique at my clinic in the past few years. They include a lesbian couple from Greater Noida," he said.Gay rights activists see this as an important step towards securing their rights as it will start an era of same sex parenting. And new legal provisions are likely to make this surrogacy easier.According to the couple, they got married last year after four years of courtship. "We felt the need for a child and came to India for adoption. Through advertisements we got to know that we can have our 'own' child using a surrogate mother. So we contacted this fertility centre and selected a surrogate mother through them. She delivered the twins - both girls - on February 1," he said. The couple spent close to Rs 12 lakh on the entire procedure. Of this amount, about Rs 3.5 lakh was given to the surrogate mother who rented out her womb.Juam and Mauro wanted their children to retain their Indian roots and hence named them Jaya and Uma. "I love this country for all it has given to me and will keep coming here," said Mauro. Sometime later, during the meeting, when Uma started crying he changed her nappy pads. The two men said they underwent a nursing training between October and December last year to learn parenting. "I want to give all possible love and care to my children," said Mauro, who works as a fashion designer.Deputy Director General of the Indian Council of Medical Research Dr R S Sharma, who has recently submitted the ART (surrogacy) Bill to the law ministry, said that at present there is no law on surrogacy in India. "The new bill, which is now with the law ministry for approval, states that ART will be available to all those couples who legally have a sexual relationship in India. So, the Indian law has to approve of a gay relationship first," said Sharma.Legal experts say that surrogacy by foreigners is taking place in India under the Indian Guardianship and Wards Act 1890, where the surrogate parents are given the status of guardians applying the adoption provision.