A SC bench dismissed review petitions filed by the Centre and gay rights activists against its December 2013 verdict, saying there is no merit in them.

Gay rights activists have expressed dismay at the Supreme Court's rejection of their review plea on Section 377.

The Supreme Court on Thursday agreed to consider the plea for an open court hearing on curative petitions filed by gay rights activists against its verdict criminalizing homosexuality.

Gay rights activists in the city have said that the Supreme Court judgment recognizing transgenders' place in the society will go a long way in empowering this "disempowered" section of the population.

Supreme Court today agreed to hear in open court a curative petition of gay rights activists for decriminalizing gay sex. The plea will be taken up next week.

Students of JNU have kept alive the flames of protest they sparked a year ago after city girl Nirbhaya was gang-raped and brutalized on December 16, 2012.

Women wing of the City Congress on Saturday took strong objection to BJP leader Tejaswini's remarks that women are ill treated in Congress and those women who compromise will reach top in the party and the government. They asked for an apology from the former MP

The Independence Day celebrations in the city is facing problem as theatre personalities on Thursday opposed the district administration's move to host cultural events at Rangayana. They have warned that they will protest at the theatre repertory if the officials go ahead with their plan. However, DC C Shikha said the Kannada and culture department has directed Rangayana to allow the district administration to host the event at the theatre repertory

Police arrested six activists of People for Better Treatment for creating disturbance at Science City where Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee handed over Bangabibhusan and Bangabhusan. They protested against awarding Dr Sukumar Mukherjee, a tainted doctor, alleged Dr Kunal Saha.

The writers and Kannada activities on Thursday upped the ante in their fight for teaching the kids in their mother tongue and asked the CM Siddaramaiah to step in

Activist Bhanvari Devi from Rajasthan will arrive in the city on March 6 evening to participate in the International Women&rsquos day celebrations to be organised by the Kerala State Women&rsquos Development Corporation. This is the first time that Bhanvari Devi, who was gang raped in 1997 for her crusade against child marriages, is visiting Thiruvananthapuram.

Environmentalist expert Vishwambhar Chaudhary; social activists Medha Patkar, Ulka Mahajan and Surekha Dalvi; Anil Avachat and Mangesh Tendulkar will come to participate in the agitaion in the coming days.

The family of RTI activist Anup Singh, who was allegedly brutalised in Noida, has fumed over local police and administration for not protecting whistle-blowers. The family - as also RTI activists - say that acts like the Lokpal or the RTI do not make any sense if protection is not given. Purusharth Aradhak

A day after RTI activist- Anup Singh was abducted, tortured by burning his body with cigarette butts and hot rods case reported in media on Thursday, UP police swung into action. The police detained a private contractor for questioning into the case.       Purusharth Aradhak