NEW DELHI: In spite of the prying eyes and shocked stares, the LGBT community in the capital came out once again in rainbow colours on Sunday to reinforce their identities. Almost three years after the judiciary decriminalized consensual sex among homosexuals, the community feels a lot more confident. However, a sense of taboo and underlying insecurity still exist, say many at the fifth Delhi Queer Pride March.The LGBT (lesbian-gay-bisexual-transgender) parade, which was flagged off from Barakhamba Road with a giant rainbow flag, attracted people with all types of sexual orientation. The parade, however, saw a dip in the number of participants, with around 200 people - mostly youngsters - turning up this year against a few hundreds last year.People in colourful costumes flaunting their sexuality marched towards Jantar Mantar. They danced to drum beats and shouted slogans like 'Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, Isai; Hetero, Homo bhai bhai', 'Baba Ramdev salwar kameez kahan chhupai', 'My mother thinks my girlfriend is a lesbian', 'fifty shades of gay' and 'Keep your laws off my body'.While tiny skirts, body-baring clothes, loud makeup and feathered masks set the carnival mood, they also unsettled many onlookers, including the members of Rashtriyawadi Janata Party and Akhil Bharatiya Kshatriya Maha Sabha, who were already protesting at Jantar Mantar.The parade, with 'genders' as its theme, demanded equal legal, social and medical rights for the community. One of the demands is to allow people to record the gender category of their choice in the national census, voter IDs and other documents.Many foreigners also took part in the march. Participants from the US, which recently legalized same-sex marriage in four more states, and the Netherlands, the first country to legalize it, hoped that the Indian gay pride parade grows larger and lobbies for equal rights.Tara (36) from the Netherlands came to Delhi from Pushkar only to attend the parade. "In my country, which is known for its liberal policies towards different sexual orientations, almost five lakh people gather for such a parade. But here numbers are far less. But at least it's being held symbolically; I really wish it grows bigger and stronger," she said. Tara also felt that in India fewer women express their sexual orientation. "In most gay parties, I am the only woman."Sasha Cohen (23), a student from the US, said President Obama's support for gay rights had led to wider acceptance of the LGBT community in his country."Thanks to the President, people from the community feel safer in most states in US. But that's not the case in other parts of the world. In India, I think there has to be a lot more campaigning for the community to open up." The gay pride in New York is much more vibrant and celebrated across communities like any other big religious festival, he added.Many participants were wearing masks, not ready to appear in public. "People are still scared to come out. But the society has started accepting us. I told my mother last year about my orientation. She said she was my mother and would accept me the way I am. I think many men are able to open up to their mothers. Police have also become more sensitive," says Vimal Bhai, an environment activist and member of National Alliance of People's Movements (NAPM).Many members say that despite general acceptance, people hardly understand members of the LGBT community."Homosexuality is not just about sex. For instance, we feel the same love for our partners as a married couple would feel for each other. Even if we don't marry, we lead our lives like a couple. But our lives are so much more insecure," said Rajesh (name changed), who wore a mask to avoid being recognized.