NEW DELHI: Even though the government supports decriminalizing same sex relationships, the LGBT community affected by the Supreme Court order on Wednesday may not get relief until at least next year if the apex court does not review its verdict. Immediate legislative antidote to the SC order upholding validity of Section 377 does not look feasible because forging a political consensus will be difficult within the short time available before the term of the current Lok Sabha ends.Official sources said if any of the affected parties were to petition the Centre to repeal Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), government could consider the issue positively, but stressed that the short time available before the 2014 Lok Sabha election would make any progress difficult. The new government will be in place only in May next year.Reacting to the verdict, home minister Sushil Kumar Shinde said, "It would not be possible to legislate on anything now." Law minister Kapil Sibal said the government could change the law, but did not spell out a timeline. "It is the prerogative of the Supreme Court under the Constitution to test the constitutionality of a law. They are exercising their prerogative. We have the prerogative to make laws. We shall exercise our prerogative," he added.Although significant sections of the political class are broadly sympathetic to the LGBT community's demand for equality, it is being recognized that they may prefer to tread cautiously on the matter for the fear of offending conservative and traditional opinion just ahead of elections. The Centre is unlikely to prioritize legalizing gay rights, a senior official said.Law ministry sources stressed that government would like to consult all political parties before bringing a bill to Parliament."All stakeholders will be consulted and that would take time," the source said. Given that the government supported de-criminalization of 377 in the SC, the premium on deliberation appeared driven more by convenience than conviction.Political sources said in view of the logjam in Parliament, it was unlikely that any such legislation could be initiated. "It is for the new government when it is formed to bring any such legislation, if consensus emerges, to overturn the SC judgment," the source said.To a question on "selective judicial activism", whether the apex court was quite willing to rule on use of red beacons but chose to put the ball on gay sex in legislature's court, Sibal said, "Legislature is the final arbiter of what law should be. I am not going to extend my comment beyond that. I cannot comment on positions a judge takes in one matter or another matter."Rural development minister Jairam Ramesh, however, said, "It is a retrograde judgment and does not do justice to a modern liberal India. If two consenting men or two consenting women agree... why should that be illegal?" The minister supported the HC bench that decriminalized homosexuality. "I thought Justice A P Shah was on the right track," Ramesh said.A two-member bench of the HC comprising Justices A P Shah and S Muralidhar had decriminalized gay sex as provided in Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and had ruled that sex between two consenting adults in private would not be an offence.Sources said the government also has the option of repealing the law through an ordinance as Parliament is unlikely to sit at length for another session. But given the poll mania and the government's fire-fighting on various fronts after Congress's defeats in assembly polls, the prospect seems rather unlikely.Hours after the SC verdict, MoS home R P N Singh tweeted, "In my personal opinion, the state should not interfere in two consenting adults' private lives."However, in his official response to the media, Singh said, "Manish Tewari has already clarified that government intends to decriminalize Section 377. The way Parliament is functioning, it's unlikely any work will be allowed by opposition."The home ministry, too, had opposed decriminalization of gay sex in its submission to the Delhi HC. It had then termed the act unnatural and responsible for spread of HIV. However, after the HC gave a historic verdict decriminalizing gay sex, the ministry supported the order in the Supreme Court.However, in February, 2012 assistant solicitor general P P Malhotra, representing the home ministry, said homosexuality was immoral and legalizing it was not in tune with the country's cultural practices. Home ministry later clarified that it did not hold such an opinion and it had no problems with repeal of the law if the court deemed it fit.