NEW DELHI: After the Supreme Court upheld Section 377 last year, criminalizing sexual relationships between same sex couples, it's been a time full of insecurities and emotional turmoil for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community. Sharif Rangnekar, author and PR professional, recently wrote a song expressing the anxiety that the community has been wracked by ever since. 'Head held high' is co-composed by musicians Adhir Ghosh and Smiti Malik and is being released under their concept band, Friends of Linger.The song was released on YouTube and Soundcloud on Tuesday and got over 3,813 views till this report was filed. While this is the digital launch of Rangnekar's campaign song on gay rights, the band has performed live several times in Delhi and Gurgaon. "We wanted to send out a strong message through a track that the gay community could use during protests. Popular music has few tracks furthering their cause. 'I want to break free' by Queen is one example. We also hope to raise funds for Naz Foundation, an NGO that has been championing the LGBT cause," he said.He was inspired by his personal experience of bias against the community as well as by Rabindranath Tagore's poem—Where the Mind is Without Fear (and the head is held high). Rangnekar's song goes: "Where the mind is not clear, and you are wondering why, cause they look at you strangely, and condition your life...give us love, give us moments, give us time, not just tokens, no symbols of air, no symbols of care, its time for us to dare ..." The YouTube video types out the song's lyrics so that the viewers can soak in the meaning and the message of the song.For Rangnekar, the song is his dedication to the community. "There are so many assumptions about the community and about the so-called morals, about what is right and wrong. Society fails to understand that it is nature at play. My lyrics are about the fear the community lives with and our life full of uncertainties and insecurities. We are told so many things about how we are. The song has been shared by academics, bloggers, human rights activists in New York, London, Seattle, etc. People relate to it," added Rangnekar.The video also gives a historical perspective—from passing of Section 377 in 1861 which criminalized homosexuality to the historic Delhi high court order of 2009 that read down the section, and the setback in 2013 with the apex court's upholding of the regressive law. Earlier this year, India also voted for a United Nations' resolution that excludes LGBT families. Rangnekar hopes that the song goes viral so that funds and support start flowing.The track can be accessed at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfrx_0HWm6U