With the SC verdict on Sec 377, a few companies have now suspended their gay support groups, which safeguarded the rights of the LGBT community in corporate Hyderabad.It begins with a snide remark, passed off as a 'water cooler joke'. Then comes the mimicking, which is supposed to be taken in good humor. But being 'open' about your sexuality at the workplace is a daunting task, what with the so-called 'straight' colleagues dealing with it in an insensitive manner. In a bid to reduce workplace bullying and discomfort, many corporate giants based in the city have, over the years, put in place inclusive HR policies for the LGBT community. But post the Supreme Court upholding the validity of Section 377, many companies have withdrawn their queer support groups, or have indirectly imposed a gag order on gay employees.Vijay Mogli, member of a community-based organisation in the city, who used to work with one of the corporates, reveals that post the SC verdict, his company has rolled back their 'queer support group'. "We had approached a particular company and pointed out to them that they stand to lose good employees, if they don't have a support group for the community in place. We gave them the examples of two other organisations which had LGBT friendly-policies. The company then began a gay support group. But post the SC verdict, the organisation has suspended the group till 'further notice'."Ronak, an employee of the corporate giant, confirms the news. "In Hyderabad, not many employees support the LGBT-friendly policies, which are meant to provide us with a safe environment. I am the only person from Hyderabad who is part of the group," says Ronak."During the pride walk in Pune, my company had supported it wholeheartedly. But now, I don't think they can do that anymore," expounds Ronak. This paradigm shift in policy can be mostly termed as a kneejerk reaction. "These companies need to operate based on the law of the land. And if the law criminalises homosexuality, they are forced to withdraw support," explains Vijay.This also puts a question mark on the various benefits enjoyed by a gay employee and his partner. "A few multinationals have insurance policies that also cover the gay employee's partner. This progressive step was welcome and other corporates too could have followed suit. However, given the nature of the situation now, it seems highly doubtful," says Vijay.But what comes as a surprise is the unsaid diktat of 'no speaking to the media' that has been issued to employees by the companies. While being homosexual is a personal preference, companies fear that ignorance on the issue could lead to this personal aspect spilling to the workplace, which could result in the organisation coming under legal hassles. Manas*, an IT professional says, "Our company does not have issues with us being homosexuals. But in accordance to company policies, we aren't allowed to publicly comment on this issue. If we do, we risk being fired from our jobs." And this is precisely the reason why Rohit* has been refraining from showing his support even on social media. "A lot of my friends from the community have been asking me why am I not showing support to the group online. While many of us want to show our support, at least via our social media, company policy dictates we can't speak publicly on the issue. I can't really explain to my gay friends why I'm mum on the issue, but the fact remains that I have a job to keep," he shares.With the umbrella of legal safety off their heads, the LGBT community in corporate India find themselves in a vulnerable position. It's the water cooler they fear the most.