MUMBAI: In January, soon after the Supreme Court upheld Section 377 of the IPC, a young man became a victim of extortion and blackmail.Rosesh (name changed) began chatting with a man called Ronak on a WhatsApp group, and the duo met at a Mira Road flat soon after. When Ronak's friend, who had gone out for cigarettes, returned to the apartment, they beat up Rosesh, and took his mobile phone and tablet.When he filed a police complaint, the officials asked Rosesh whether he had had sex with either of the two men. It was only after he replied in the negative that he was assured of their cooperation. After he received his phone and tablet, Rosesh decided to drop the case.The fact that the Nallasopara resident even chose to file a complaint is a rarity.While the LGBT community has frequently been the target of hostility and blackmail, there has been a marked rise in distress calls from gay men after the SC verdict. Criminal groups target potential victims through websites and apps such as Planet Romeo, Facebook, Grindr and Whatsapp. A meeting is set up at a hotel room or apartment, and other gang members soon barge in to demand money. But complaints are hardly ever filed due to fear of social backlash or harassment by the police themselves.The FIRs lodged in the two recent extortion cases, involving a hotel executive and a merchant navy employee, are a milestone for the community."It's significant that there were FIRs filed. That is generally unheard of," says LGBT rights activist Harish Iyer. "Police file NC (non-cognisable) complaints, if at all." It was only after Sunil (name changed) read the news reports of the first gay extortion case that he summoned the courage to approach the police. The merchant navy employee had been assaulted and robbed by three members of the same gang earlier this year.To keep track of the growing number of extortion cases, Humsafar Trust has begun compiling a database of the harassers' photos, aliases and area of operation. "We went back to previous complaints and realized that the same faces kept cropping up," says Humsafar's advocacy officer Sonal Giani. "They go by different names. One has as many as Zargam, Armaan, Aman, Zaid and Sameer!" Other prominent activists from the community are also adding the complaints that they have received."The modus operandi remains the same," says Iyer. "The guy (from the gang) goes into the bathroom and the doorbell rings. More people then barge into the room, and they all blackmail the (victim) and demand money. It's like a formula that is being repeated."The details have also been sent to LGBT forums and people encouraged to come forward with their own experiences. "We want to make sure everyone knows who these criminals are and also have all the details ready when someone files a complaint," Giani says, adding that while NGOs provide support and legal advice, the case cannot move forward unless the victim backs it."People comment on the (extortionists') profiles on Planet Romeo, saying 'This guy is a crook, beware of him' but no one actually lodges a police complaint," says Sunil. In his case, the process of filing an FIR had taken a while. The police at the CST police station had earlier insisted on an NC complaint instead, then left out crucial details.In the first case, involving the gay hotel executive, it was only after the intervention of Aam Aadmi Party activists that the complaint was registered. "Political will does help the cause in a very large way," admits Iyer. "There has been activism happening without any political party's support of course, but having somebody from the other side of the spectrum with you does give a lot of moral support." And with the section 377 case being at the mercy of the Parliament, he says, any political help coupled with systemic change would be very welcome.