Actress-writer Lena Dunham has been named as the recipient of advocacy group Point Foundation's Horizon Award 2014 for her support of the gay community.

While the government has as yet neither considered the 15 ITBP jawans, who died in a chopper crash during a rescue mission in the 2013 Uttarakhand deluge, for gallantry medals nor given them the promised PM's Life Saving Medal, the force on Saturday honoured eight of these 'martyrs'. The families of these jawans were felicitated by Himveers Wives Welfare Association.

Dr Anup Marar, director, OCHRI was honoured with Dr Ronaldo Ross Health International Award 2014 while Manjiri Damle, renal transport cell coordinator, OCHRI was also awarded, by Pune-based Dr Madhusudan Ghanekar Brahmadnyan Vidyapeeth during the 13th Mahatma Phule social research international inter-disciplinary conference on education for achieving millennium development goals on Teachers' Day organized by Mahatma Phule Talent Research Academy and Radhikatai Pandav College of Engineering.

Artist Jogen Chowdhury has been invited to be the first artist to stay at the Rashtrapati Bhavan under the in-residence scheme for writers and artists, it was announced Monday. "Jogen Chowdhury, member of parliament (Rajya Sabha); professor emeritus of Visva Bharati University, Santiniketan and former keeper (art) at Rashtrapati Bhavan (1972-87) has been invited to be the inaugural artist to stay there," said a statement from the Rashtrapati Bhavan

Reserve Bank of India has started work on enabling banks to provide an honourable exit to unsuccessful entrepreneurs from unattractive businesses in the absence of good bankruptcy legal system, RBI executive director B Mahapatra said at an ASSOCHAM event.

High court orders police protection for Rajasthani girl, Manju, 19, who apprehended honour killing for having married a Tamil youth in Coimbatore. She is also allowed to go with her husband.

Investigators looking into the honour killing case of Abhishek Yadav have found bloodstains and his missing footwear in a forest at Vasai on Saturday. ET NOW turns 5. Watch No1 Biz News Channel of India for unbiased coverage of Markets and Economy.

Veteran Marathi film/theatre personality   Ashalata Vabgaonkar was honoured  with a special Kritadnyata Puraskar   for lifetime achievement by the chief minister Manohar Parrikar at the inaugural ceremony of the Goa Marathi film festival   in Panaji Friday evening.

Mantralaya seer Subhudendra will be accorded civic honour at Mnagalore Town Hall on Thursday at 5pm. Pejawar Seer Vishweshateertha and Dharmasthala Dharmadhikari D Veerendra Heggade will be present on the occasion.

Bits Pilani has awarded a doctorate Degree in Public Policy to S Krishna Kumar,Congress leader and former Union Minister. Kumar has been on part-time research at the University for the last 4 years on Kerala's Development Model and ideal Strategies for the future. Watch election news on TIMES NOW No.1 Eng News Channel of India. Do not miss it till Result Day May 16

The president of India Pranab Mukherjee  conferred the Florence Nightingale awards to 35 nurses from across the country including two from Bihar at a function held at  Durbar Hall in New Delhi on Monday in the presence of Ghulam Nabi Azad, union minister for Health and Family Welfare and  others. The prestigious award was given to Martha Dodray and   Annamma Varghese from Bihar.

Dr K S Madhava Rao will be awarded with prestigious "Fellow of American Psychiatric Association" in recognition of his significant contribution and service to the field of psychiatry at the  167 th  American Psychiatric Society Conference . Dr Rao happens to be the first such recipient from Dakshina Kannada.

Dr KS Madhava Rao, president, Indian Psychiatric Society (Karnataka Chapter) will be participating in the 167 th American Psychiatric Society Conference to be held at New York, from May 4-7.