A new study has found that kids who have two moms or dads are happier than the ones who have a mom and dad as parents.

A newly-married couple from Puducherry was crushed to death when their motorbike was hit by a speeding lorry from behind on the Cuddalore-Chidambaram road in Cuddalore district. Police said S Kumar, 26 from Manakuppam near Villianur in Puducherry and K Subasree, 20 from the same locality got married 15 days ago. Kumar was working in a private company in Puducherry. The couple was proceeding in a bike to their relative's house when the mishap occurred.

Unidentified assailants had eliminated the elderly couple identified as Surendra Kumar (67) and his wife Kamal Bhalla (63) following property dispute, said police. You dont have to live with pain. Call VARDAN for a Functional Manual Therapy appointment on 09910955500. Centres in Delhi and Gurgaon.

Police claimed that they had recovered the gold jewellery they had stolen from the society office after killing Hafiz and later pawned in three pawnbrokers in the Neelansandra. The cops have found the receipts of the jewellery stolen from the society office which was later pawned in three shops which bore the signature of Syed Salman Shah.

An elderly couple, Paatrik Kujur (62) and his wife Alveshiya (58) suspected to be practising black magic was killed allegedly by 3 women in Jashpur district of Chhattisgarh on Wednesday.

Court said that arrest should generally be deferred or avoided on the immediate receipt of a complaint by the parents or family members of girl taking into consideration the law laid down by Supreme Court.

In the cases related to "run away couple" Himachal Pradesh High Court on Wednesday issued detailed guidelines to state police authorities making it clear that in the eventuality of any complaint of kidnapping or abduction having received from any of the family members of girl, the boy (husband) will not be arrested unless and until the prejudicial statement is given by the girl (wife).

The Pant nagar police have registered an accidental case and are waiting for the couple to recover. Rekha Gupta suffered 90 per cent burn injuries, while her husband Babu Gupta (25) has received 70 percent injuries and both are Rajawadi Hospital. Gupta came home drunk when Rekha screamed at him. The couple had a heated argument after which Rekha went inside kitchen and attempted suicide, the police said. Want to be a Journalist? Come to Times School of Journalism. Visit tcms.in

A couple sustained burn injuries when the wife in a fit of rage poured kerosene on herself and tried to self immolate in Guru Nanak Nagar building in Pant Nagar in Ghatkopar east Thursday evening. The husband also sustained injuries while trying to save her. The couple's ten years old daughter too received minor injuries. Want to be a Journalist? Come to Times School of Journalism. Visit tcms.in