MUMBAI: Keith founded an online queer magazine around four years ago and has been a visible face in the gay rights movement in Mumbai. "Oddly enough, I stayed closeted to my immediate family for over 20 years," he said. A day after the Supreme Court judgment Keith came out to his dad. "The verdict made me realize that if we choose to remain closeted and silent, we will always get counted as 'a minuscule fraction of the country's population'," Keith told TOI, requesting his last name not be used to give his dad some more time to adjust.Over the past two days, there has been a virtual "avalanche of coming outs" as one activist puts it. In fact, TOI's call for reactions to the judgment saw a deluge of emails—many from persons who were not out to even their families. Some have used SMSs, some declaring it on social media, some even writing detailed emails to their parents. Celebrity hairstylist Sapna Moti Bhavnani decided to use Facebook to come out as "queer". She said the apex court verdict was the "last straw", which pushed her to declare her sexual orientation.Activists say the 'coming out' wave surprised many. "I expected that this would push people into the closets even more, but a sizable number of those, who were sitting on the fence came out as gay and bisexual," said Harish Iyer, an equal rights activist. "I have heard of 10 different cases of people who I thought were heterosexual, came out as lesbian, bisexual and gay."Though Keith was worried about the reaction, he was surprised how his dad took it. "For Dad, it was a bolt from the blue. He was evidently upset, but he seems to be making his peace with it. He said that I was his son and he would continue to love me, is acceptance enough for me. Of course, I am not going to push the envelope and it's going to be baby steps from here onwards, but at least it's a start."Vinit B came out to his ex-professor and two friends who he knew from school days. "They are close to me and deserved to know what was going on in my life and what I was going through. I had always wanted to tell them, but the verdict gave me both the agitation to speak and the courage to face the consequences."For Anish Nair the frustration at the SC verdict pushed him to come out to his mother. "On the night of the judgment, my mom was making dinner and I was watching the TV debates. I just went in the kitchen and told my mom What if I say I am gay?" says Anish. "She just stopped what she was doing and said 'what are you saying?' Then she said, 'I am a mother and I accept you the way you are'. We both decided that telling my father right now would jeopardize things for me."