SC says Sinha''s charge against Rastogi stands disproved. Earlier Sinha said he could not file an affidavit to substantiate his charge against Rastogi.

Supreme Court rejects Suresh Dada Jain''s plea for bail and to quash the criminal case is the housing scam against him.

SC awards death sentence to a 47 year old man from Maharashtra finding him guilty of raping a 4 year-old girl and then stoning her to death.

SC said the case fell in the rarest of rare category as the child had always referred to the man from neighbourhood as uncle and trusted him.

SC said the way the man betrayed the child''s trust and brutally raped and murdered her, he deserved nothing but death penalty.

The three-judge bench in a unanimius decision said the depraved man deserved death penLty as he was a threat to young girls and the balance in soeciety.

The Supreme Court ruling closed a small window opened by the Delhi high court to permit consensual gay sex between adults in private.

The Supreme Court’s decision on Tuesday to dismiss petitions seeking review of its ruling on Section 377 of the IPC has triggered cries of injustice from the LGBT community.

SC says Sinha''s charge against Rastogi stands disproved. Earlier Sinha said he could not file an affidavit to substantiate his charge against Rastogi.

The SC also rejects CBI director Ranjit Sinha''s charge that DIG Santosh Rastogi was the ''mole'' who leaked information to petitioner.

SC orders CBI director not to interfere with 2G scam case in any member and puts in charge the investigating team it had constituted to take care of prosecution and probe into 2G scam.

SC says it finds the allegations that the CBI Director was trying to scuttle 2g scam prima facie true.

Supreme Court dismisses SLP filed by trading clients against the grant of bail by Bombay high court to Jignesh Shah.

BCCI says it will postpone the November 20 AGM scheduled to elect board president to await the SC view on Srinivasan.

SC refuses to entertain AAP''s plea for fixing dates for holding fresh elections to Delhi Assembly, which was dissolved after no party staked claim to form government.

SC disposes of AAP''s petition which had sought holding of fresh elections.

SC says it is for the election commission to fix schexule for polls and not for court to direct the commission.