Mamata Banerjee will stage a protest march against CBI being used a political weapon by BJP and for that she will walk from College Square to Dharmatala.

There are no news stories on National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights

Commemorating the 30th year of November 1984 anti-Sikh riots, leaders and activists of various Sikh bodies led by Dal Khalsa, Damdami Taksal and SAD (Panch Pardani) undertook a long march under the banner of 'Rights and Justice March'

Hundreds of Ludhianvis turned up to spread word about Cancer by participating in the Second Annual Cancer Awareness Walkathon organised by Can Fight Cancer (CFC), an NGO involved in spreading awareness against cancer and spreading message of early detection here on Sunday.

A joint flag march was conducted by the army and the Mumbai Police at Mahim West on Saturday morning. The idea was to instil confidence in people in the run up to the state polls.  Sparkle your Diwali.. 8 pm onwards only on Romedy NOW.

In order to inspire confidence among the people ahead of the state assembly polls scheduled for October 15, police personnel from Borivali and Dindoshi held flag marches on Wednesday. Sparkle your Diwali.. 8 pm onwards only on Romedy NOW.

LMC has organised a morning march for students of different schools in all six zones on Oct 1 at 8 am with the help of principals and DIOS. Zonal officer will take care of the arrangements for the march.  Prominent landmarks have been identified to start of the march at different places. The objective of the march is to inculcate clean garbage disposal habits among students.  Watch the Indian TV Premiere of RUSH Sunday 1PM and 9 PM only on MOVIES NOW.

Balasore district police as well as paramilitary forces jointly conducted a flag march in Balasore town and Basta to give a boost to the morale and instill confidence of the people. "We have planned similar practice in the coming days," Balasore SP Awinash Kumar said.

Charging Narendra Modi government with not fulfilling the promises made before coming to power at the Centre, Congress has decided to take out protest marches across all the district headquarters of UP on September 2, the day NDA completes its 100 days in office.

The students of  Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University ( GADVASU ) are to take out a march  starting from the University gate at 10 am tomorrow morning. Political parties and NGO's all in their support.  ET NOW turns 5. Watch No1 Biz News Channel of India for unbiased coverage of Markets and Economy.

People including a large number of women and children holding placards in their hands marched from Phoolbagh to Meghdoot tri-section took part in the silent protest. The placards read slogans like 'Stand against terrorism' and 'stop killing people'.

To protest against the killing of the innocents in Iraq and terrorism at large, the people of different communities stepped out on roads and took out a silent march.

Kerala Swathantra Matsya Thozhilali Federation will stage a   dharna at the Secretariat on April 29 demanding the cancellation of government's decision to amend the    Coastal Regulation Zone notification. Want to be a Journalist? Come to Times School of Journalism. Visit tcms.in