Celena Jaitley has taken a whole lot of abuse these past few weeks for her bold support of gay rights. Among those spewing venom, a common refrain is that these advocates and the homosexuals they support are corrupting India with evil Western culture.

Is anyone else getting deja vu? This seems to be the go-to argument for people who don’t want the status quo disrupted, because it happens to suit them just fine. Hardliners have used this pretext to justify all sorts of repressive behavior, usually against women. The most shocking recent example was the attack in February on women at a pub in Mangalore. Their crime? They were at a pub.

The Evil West argument is pretty flimsy when it comes to homosexuality and gay rights in India. Here are a few reasons why:

1) Homosexuality has existed throughout human history, all across the world. It has nothing to do with East, West, North, South or any other arbitrary distinctions that we humans invent.

2) Western countries like to oppress homosexuals, too. The West has no shortage of Moral Police types, who spend their lives trying to dictate how others should live.

3) Non-Western countries have embraced gay rights. It would be easier for a gay couple to get married in Nepal right now than in most parts of the United States.

4) In India, it was the British who criminalized homosexuality, not the Indians.

5) Equality and basic human rights are not exclusively Western principles. Gays all over the world deserve to be treated with dignity and respect. As two of the world’s most influential democracies, India and the United States have a unique responsibility to be role models for tolerance. We should be the first to extend equal protection and freedom to all citizens, not just the majority. Isn’t that what our democratic ideals are all about?

There is a big logical flaw in assuming that homosexuality exists only if the society at large acknowledges it. It has existed and will continue to exist regardless of what government and heterosexuals do and say. Why can’t we–the United States, India, and all the other countries that still treat homosexuals like second-class citizens–just accept that and move on? To use one of Barack Obama’s favorite expressions, it’s time to get on the right side of history on this one.