MUMBAI: A vast majority of gay men in Mumbai - as high as 70 % - get married to a woman by the time they turn 30. In a country where the law criminalises homosexuality, such figures are not surprising.A study conducted by Humsafar Trust, an NGO in the city, has revealed that at least 27% of 24- to 25-year-old gay men are married. The number goes up with age - 70% of them in the 30s have tied the knot. As one moves to tier-II cities, such as Pune, Baroda and Ahmedabad, the percentage rises to as high as 82."Social ostracism is the biggest fear,'' says gay activist Nitin Karani, who has over the years, seen gay friends and even a former boyfriend succumb to social pressure. "The concept of not getting married is alien to most gay men and many are afraid of being treated like outcasts.'' Only a few, he says, consider the impact of the sham relationship on the innocent women they get married to. "You should get married to someone because you want to be with that person for the rest of your life. Not because you want to please your parents. That is unfair.'' He says the only panacea to the problem is "stand up to the pressure and seek help from friends and gay support groups''.Fifteen months after his marriage, Manavendra Singh Gohil, the prince of the erstwhile princely state of Rajpipla, settled for a divorce when he realised he was gay. This was years before he turned up on the Oprah Winfrey show and set up a gay rights group, Lakshya Trust in Baroda."Just say `no','' is his advice to gay men who approach Lakshya to seek help on how to convince the parents. "Many parents go to the extent of emotionally blackmailing their children and even threaten to disown them if they don't agree to tie the knot,'' said Gohil.These fake relationships, obviously, have their repercussions. Mumbai resident Gaurav's marriage which lasted eight years, saw the 35-year-old sink into deep depression. He came out with the truth within a year of the marriage and it was tough both for him and his wife. "Many can't deal with their sexual orientation. The dual life they lead - being married to a woman and also cruising men - leads to psycho-social pressure and depression is common,'' said Vivek Anand, chief executive of Humsafar.What worries many gay rights groups is the risk that the woman is exposed to. "Studies have shown that if the gay man is promiscuous, it makes his wife most vulnerable to sexually transmitted infections,'' said Gohil.A substantial number of such marriages end in a bitter breakdown of the relationship and even divorce. Under the Indian law, homosexuality is not considered a reason for getting a divorce, so charges of impotency and non-consummation of marriage fly thick and high.