Radhika Vaz is that pretty Anglo-Indian school teacher of yours, who would wear a cute dress and make books breathe and shiver with her lipsticked enunciations, except for one tiny detail. Vaz, a 41-year-old standup comedian, would never cough over words like farts and many other words that many other people would be very uncomfortable using.

Her bold takes on aging will soon fill St Andrews auditorium in Bandra, where the Mumbai-born Vaz will begin a four-city tour of her new show, ‘Older, Angrier and Hairier’.

Body of a youth was found in forest area adjoining Kalariya village of Dhar district on Indore-Dhar road on Monday morning. A passersby informed cops who identified it as Ramlal, son of Chunnilal Chowdhry, 38, a resident of Kalariya village. A report was filed at Betma police station.

The bodies of two siblings, who were drowned in Varuna Lake near Kesare on Saturday, were found on Monday

Body of a youth was found in forest area adjoining Kalariya village of Dhar district on Indore-Dhar road on Monday morning.

P {margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0;} Mutilated body of Ashish Kumar Vishwakarma (14) of Kudi village missing since November 2, was found near Bakahar-nullah under Manihan police station in Mirzapur district today.

The body of a scrap vendor who had drowned in a manhole in Bhayander (east) while stealing iron rods on November 12 was fished out on Friday after a massive search.

Chhattisgarh: The local body poll results would be declared on December 15, said State Election Commissioner.

Chhattisgarh : the filing of nominations for local body elections will start from November 17 and the last date of filing nominations is November 24.

Chhattisgarh : for the first time EVMs will be used in local body elections which will also have none of the above (NOTA) option.

Local body election in Chhattisgarh will be held in two phases on December 8 and December 11, State Election Commissioner PC Dalei.

Dead body of an unidentified middle- aged man was found in Karbara area near Dana Mandi here on Friday evening.

An unidentified man, in his fifties, was found dead in Santa Cruz on Saturday morning. Police officials said that the deceased may have died, prima facie, due to a cardiac arrest. A round 8.25 am, the police spotted the deceased lying on a pavement at Juhu Tara Road near Hotel Sea Princess. Sparkle your Diwali.. 8 pm onwards only on Romedy NOW.