Soon after Supreme Court recognized transgender as a third gender, it seems Chhattisgarh’s transgender have started gathering courage to confront the reality in society.

After two recent incidents of same sex love, now a 22-year-old girl who was in relation with a minor girl committed suicide at Pakhanjur tehsil of Kanker district on Saturday.

A 25-year-old youth in tribal Jashpur district was caught for the third time, trying to entrap boys in the garb of woman’s voice.

In an interesting case of same sex love, a 25-year-old youth in tribal Jashpur district was caught for the third time, trying to entrap boys in the garb of woman’s voice.

The special mobile squad of Kasaragod police arrested a sub inspector of police on the charge of sexually abusing a dalit woman. According to police, they arrested Sugunan, the grade SI at Adoor police station, on the basis of the complaint by a dalit woman that he sexually abused her and made her pregnant. Sugunan was later produced in the local court in Kasaragod, which sent him in judicial remand till November 25.

About a fortnight after a 34-year-old teacher was booked for allegedly sexually abusing a minor boy of Sham Nagar area following the efforts of Bachpan Bachao Andolan, an NGO of Noble Peace Prize Winner Kailash Satyarthi , police is yet to arrest the accused in the case.

Social service unit of crime branch has on Monday arrested Vishal Jaiswal after raiding a Duplex bungalow at Sahu Nagar on Besa Road where the culprit allegedly has been engaged in operating a sex trade racket. A victim girl, native of Gwalior, has been also rescued during the raid. Time for The Big Reset. Decode Budget 2014 with the best experts on ET NOW. 7am onwards on 10th July

P {margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0;} Social service wing of crime branch swooped down on the fourth floor of an apartment in Ganeshpeth on Saturday busting a sex racket. Apart from arresting a couple for operating the racket, police team has also rescued two girls who were forced to work for the material gain of the culprits.

Peoples' Union for Civil Liberties has filed a complaint with the Karnataka State Human Rights Commission, on behalf of sex workers who are being subjected to police violence in Majestic, Upparpete KG Road and adjoining areas in Bangalore.

The Bengaluru city police have denied permission to the organizers of Kiss of Love which was planned to hold at Town Hall premises on November 30. Police commissioner MN Reddi said that as the event attracted the provisions of IPC sections that bars anyone to stage obscenity. He said the organizers did not answer several questions raised by the police including the number, timings and precations the organizers have taken for the event.

After Saturday's protest demonstration at Jhandewalan, students of Jawaharlal Nehru University are having their own Kiss of Love at 4:30 at Ganga Dhaba, on campus.

Home minister Ramesh Chennithala said that it was the timely intervention of the police that avoided a big law and order problem at the venue of Kiss of Love. If they were not detained at that time the protestors against this campaign would have been turned more violent. Hence the police tried to avoid this and shift the people who had come for the campaign from the scene, said the home minister.

A year after a minor girl allegedly disappeared with the driver/conductor of her school bus her parents has alleged that the accused was a Muslim boy who had adapted a Hindu name and BJP leaders have started alleging that it was another case of Love Jihad.

Attacking BJP over the issue of 'love jihad', senior Uttar Pradesh minister Azam Khan has said that both 'love' and 'jihad' are "paak lafz" (pure words) and should not be misused to vitiate the atmosphere.

The campaign launched by Sangh Parivar against Muslim youth in the  name of 'fictitious Love Jihad' is nothing but old game played by them to divide  people on religious lines for easy political gains, said K M Shareef, Chairman of Popular  Front of India.