KATHMANDU: Latino heartthrob Ricky Martin's announcement through his official web site that he is gay comes as a shot in the arm for Nepal's homosexual community, who are hoping it will help them win a case against "injustice"."We are absolutely joyous that Ricky Martin has honestly revealed his sexual orientation," said Sunil Babu Pant, the Himalayan nation's only openly gay celebrity who is now also an icon for the sexual minorities in South Asia. "The coming out of celebrities helps the cause of grassroot lesbian, gay and third gender people. It raises their self-esteem and makes society regard them with a more positive attitude."Pant, who is an MP as well as founder of Blue Diamond Society (BDS), Nepal's pioneer gay rights organisation, is hoping that the Ricky Martin incident will help the court case BDS is fighting to get justice for a lesbian traffic cop who has been under arrest since last month. Ramina Hussain, in her late 20s, says she fell in love with a 17-year-old girl she met while being pressed into domestic duty at the resident of a senior police officer. The two, according to Hussain, fell in love despite fierce opposition from the former's family.According to the deposition filed in Supreme Court, the teen decided to leave her home and the two began living together about three months ago. When her family came to know where she had gone, they forced her to come back and compelled her to say Hussain had kidnapped her, subsequently leading to Hussain's arrest. BDS says the teen's aunt is a senior police officer and so, there is pressure from police authorities to prevent Hussain's release under bail. The hearing is being deliberately stalled.Pant wishes gay celebrities in Nepal would also start coming out of the closet, which would help erasing the discrimination and injustice faced by gays in the lower rungs of society. "There are gays in Nepal's high society as well as Bollywood and Hollywood ," he says. "There are some in the extended former royal family of Nepal as well. However, it takes time to come out."Martin's revelation, he says, is no surprise to the world gay community. "During international conferences, when we discussed potentially gay celebrities, Martin's name often popped up. Being a family man and in limelight, it takes a lot of guts to come out. Congratulations, Martin, for coming out as you are, finally."