The LGBT community in India is organizing a massive protest movement, to be held on December 15, against the Supreme Court's judgment re-criminalizing homosexuality.Everyone, from politicians to film stars and even the aam aadmi, slammed the Supreme Court of India for the very regressive verdict of overturning the decriminalisation of Section 377 of the IPC by the Delhi High Court in 2009. And now, the community has mobilised a massive protest movement the coming Sunday. "It will be called the Global Outrage Day, and will be held on December 15, the coming Sunday.We want to make it known that this is being organised by the entire community, and we don't want any individual or group forefronting this and taking ownership of this. This initiative is basically an effort to bring the community together, and to ensure our fight gets a unified voice globally," says Mohnish, a gay rights activist. In Delhi, the protest begins at 3pm on December 15, at Jantar Mantar."As of now, we have confirmed participation from Sydney, New York, Boston, Washington DC, London, Jordan, Cambridge, Berlin, Toronto, Richmond, Ann Arbor and Johannesburg internationally. I am sure that by December 15, more countries will join in. In India, we will be mobilising protest gatherings in Delhi, Mumbai, Pune, Hyderabad, Chennai, Calcutta and other cities. We are working on the logistics right now. We want the whole world to know how it is, when basic human rights are trampled upon," says another activist associated with this protest. "A Facebook page has been created. A few of us have got together and started reaching out to our Indian friends in these countries around the world.They are mobilising the Indian community in these places to observe this Outrage Day. We have been assured of local participation and co-operation of the authorities in all these cities the world over. And anybody and everybody who shares our anger at this judgment is welcome to join in," says another activist.The LGBT community has called it a worldwide movement, which will not only talk about one community in any one country, but will address the various other LGBT communities across the world. The LGBT community in Delhi has sent across invites to other communities all across the globe to be part of the rally. Adds Manish Sharma, a gay activist, "We have raised funds to invite people of our community from all across the nation who are not able spend that much money to come all the way to Delhi for the rally. We have made arrangements for them to be part of the rally that will be held in the capital on Sunday. All the protestors in the rally will be wearing black bands that will read 'No going back 377'. It is time we protest and fight for our rights."Also, sources say, regular gay parties in the capital will not be discontinued despite the judgment. "Despite the SC's verdict, the gay parties that were organised every Tuesday and Saturday at a popular gay nightclub called Peppers will go on. Pehle bhi party karte thay, after 2009, aur ab bhi hum party karenge," says the source. Apparently, a party called Naach Naach Ke Azadi Lenge will also be organised today, on December 14, at the same club in the capital.