MUMBAI: The Vasai Government Railway Police (GRP) on Monday registered a FIR against two unknown persons for assaulting and extorting money from a gay commuter at the Vasai railway station on Friday.The police refuted allegations that the two suspects were GRP constables. The 28-year-old victim had alighted at the Vasai station at around 11.45 pm on Friday. He went to use the toilet on south end of platform number 2-3 when the two men allegedly approached the victim and teased him for being gay.The suspects, believed to be constables from the detection department, then accused the victim of trying to indulge in sex in the toilet. They took the victim to the foot overbridge and threatened to make a case against him. They demanded cash for letting him off.The victim who was badly beaten up was forcibly taken to a State Bank of India (SBI) ATM outside the station and forced to withdraw Rs 25,000. Fully aware that the ATM would have closed circuit cameras, the suspects stood outside the ATM while the victim withdrew the cash.The police maintained that the two suspects were civilians and not constables. The police are now looking at the CCTV grabs on the platform and the bridge to ascertain who the suspects were.The victim maintained that the assaulters were cops. The victim who sustained injuries on his chin and hands was on Monday discharged from the Cardinal Gracious hospital.According to gay rights activist Ashok Row Kavi, there is a rise in railway police extorting money from gay commuters on platforms and railway toilets, in particular."There have been similar cases in Bhayander and Virar stations. We have made complaints but nothing has been done about it so far," said Kavi.The suspects are believed to have followed the victim to the toilet. They were believed to be drunk.Senior inspector, Vasai GRP, Praful Kshirsagar said that the victim's statement will be recorded before arriving at whether the constables in question were involved. As of now a case against 'unknown persons' has been registered for extortion, wrongful confinement, voluntarily causing hurt and criminal intimidation.Family members of the victim said that they were under pressure to withdraw the case.