The Kolhapur District Bar Association (KDBA) is likely to boycott the Maha Lok Adalat scheduled in December 2014 as part of its agitation over the long-pending demand of a separate Bombay high court bench in the city.

The members of Pondicherry Bar Association boycotted court proceedings on Friday demanding the authorities concerned to fill up the vacant post of the chief judicial magistrate in Puducherry court. Functioning of all courts in Puducherry was affected following the boycott. The association issued the boycott call on Thursday. The members also resolved to felicitate retired justice David Annusamy.

Sahyog Trust will start fellowship for Nagpur and Chandrapur district for young advocates who have social interest. Young advocates who have interest in social work may contact to Trustee of Sahyog Trust, Dr Ravindra Bhusari on 9373121680.

With the government decision to put in-charge of Tukoganj police station KL Dangi under suspension till completion of investigation, lawyers of Indore who were on protest for last 15-days call off their strike and promised to resume their work from Monday.

Face off between lawyers and police seems to have no end, on Wednesday Agrawal Samal joined the ongoing tussle and approached IG Indore against the high handedness of lawyers. On the other hand lawyers continued their strike pressing for suspension of SHO of Tukoganj and revocation of FIR against lawyers.

Lawyers who argue for justice to their clients themselves are seeking justice from the authorities   following   delay in holding the elections to the Mysore Bar association by the present body whose term has ended in last November itself

Vivek Ghatge won the election for the presidential post of the Kolhapur district bar association (KDBA) though his panel lost the overall majority in the 15-member organization on Wednesday. The elections results were declared at 2am on Thursday.

P {margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0;} In support of Samajwadi party candidate, Abhishek Mishra, various lawyers in city staged a road show in different localities. The road show visited places like Kaiserbagh Chouraha, Golaganj etc. Even locals joined the procession. The All India Trade association members have also gathered to support the SP candidate and have appealed people to vote.

Mamata Agarwal, prime accused in the Short Street shoot-out case, has prayed before Calcutta High Court for cancellation of bail of lawyer Samir Riaz. The court has admitted the petition and directed her lawyer Phiroze Edulji to serve notices to respondents. Riaz was arrested for his alleged involvement in the attack on the premises at 9A, Short Street, on September 15, 2013.

Well-known senior lawyer Shrihari Aney accused Supreme Court judges of overstepping their jurisdiction many a times. Speaking at function organized by Nagpur University at the Convocation Hall, the staunch Vidarbha protagonist criticized the apex court for deviating from its role of interpretation and taking up the mantle of enacting laws.

One of the two families that refused to vacate included that of high court lawyer Sindha Sridharan, who went to court challenging the BMC's eviction notice.

One of the two families that refused to vacate included that of high court lawyer Sindha Sridharan,who  went to court challenging the BMC's eviction notice.

Members of the Thrissur bar association took out a march to the office of the Inspector General of Police (Thrissur range) to protest against alleged assault of a woman lawyer and her children at the Thrissur East police station couple of days back. RK Asha, a Thrissur-based lawyer and activist, was reportedly abused and assaulted by police officers attached to the Thrissur East police station on Sunday.