The Three Hungry Men - city's intrepid group of food reviewers are all set to give students studying in 10th standard and their parent's food for thought with their corporate social responsibility programme - The Right Choice at Vikas PU College, Maryhill here on November 1.  ​

Nominations have been invited for Nani Palkhivala Civil Liberties Award by The Nani A Palkhivala Memorial Trust. The award will be given to individuals and organizations who have displayed extraordinary initiative in preservation, protection and defence of human rights in India. Justice Sujata Manohar, former judge, Supreme Court of India, Sudha N Murthy, chairperson, Infosys Foundation and Justice Sam Variava, former judge, Supreme Court of India will be the judges. Information can be had on 022-22614253 or mail ffe@vsnl.net.

Kozhikode District information office will organize workshop on 'Right to Service' at Koyilandy and Vadakara, on October 15. K Shantha, chairperson of Koyilandy municipality will inaugurate the workshop at taluk conference hall, Koyilandy at 10 am. C K Nanu MLA will inaugurate the workshop at Vadakara taluk conference hall at 2 pm.

"A probe report was sought by the Muzaffarpur DM and SSP as well as the state social welfare department director by September 5 but none has been received," Neelmani said adding, " If   they fail to send it by October 15, the commission will summon them in person."

The commission had taken suo motu cognizance of the matter on August 19, BHRC member Neelmani had asked that the joint report should cover the administrative lapses, criminal liabilities, actions taken so far and actions proposed in the matter.

Patna: The Bihar Human Rights Commission (BHRC) on Friday directed the Muzaffarpur district magistrate (DM) and senior superintendent of police (SSP) to submit a joint probe report by October 15 positively in a matter pertaining to the death of a juvenile lodged at   Muzaffarpur remand home on August 17.

According to the statistics available with the BHRC, out of 119 such murders recorded in the country in 2012, Odisha accounted for the highest 32 while Bihar reported 13 such cases. It may be mentioned that Bihar was the first state in the country to enact a law on this subject in 1999 known as Prevention of Witch Practices Act.

Taking suo motu cognizance of news reports of inhuman treatment meted out to victims of witch-hunting in Bihar, the commission said various agencies of the government should work in tandem for an effective and holistic response to stop such incidents or practices. "Of late, there have been many reports of alleged witchcraft and victimisation of   women. The commission would like to contribute effectively in bringing down the resultant human rights violations," BHRC member Neelmani said.

Patna: The Bihar Human Rights Commission (BHRC) on Wednesday asked the Bihar director general of police (DGP) and principal secretary, social welfare department (SWD), to probe the incidents of alleged witch-hunting and whether there is   any provision for rehabilitation or any form of compensation to women who are victim of violence in the name of with-hunting in the state.

National human rights commission senior research officer S K Jain will speak on the rights of the transgender community during a one-day programme to be organized by the political science and public administration wing, directorate of distance education, Annamalai University at 9.30am on August 11 in the library auditorium.

Kerala Human Rights Commission has directed the Directorate of Public Instructions to ensure that the academic time in schools is not compromised by co-curricular activities and that all delegates including VIPs who attend school programmes reach on time to become a role model for the students to emulate.  Time for The Big Reset. Decode Budget 2014 with the best experts on ET NOW. 7am onwards on 10th July

Kerala State Commission for Protection of Child Rights has taken suo motu cognizance of the  food poisoning incident that led to hospitalization of the 12 students and two teachers of Cotton Hill Girls School four days back  and has sought an explanation from the concerned authorities within 10 days. ET NOW turns 5. Watch No1 Biz News Channel of India for unbiased coverage of Markets and Economy.

Kerala State Human Rights Commission has sought the state government to do away with the practice of policemen standing on guard for long hours continuously for three days at police stations carrying heavy rifles. KSHRC chairman Justice J B Koshi handed over anonymous complaints from the policemen to the state government addressed to Home Department principal secretary. ET NOW turns 5. Watch No1 Biz News Channel of India for unbiased coverage of Markets and Economy.

Kerala State Commission for Protection of Child Rights has issued notice to the concerned authorities of the Kerala Olympic Association building at Vanrose junction in the city for housing children in unhygienic environs as part of sports training. The Commission has issued notice to the Sports and Youth affairs director, Kerala Sports Council secretary, Kerala Olympic Association president.