NOIDA/GURGAON: Same-sex marriages have never been legal in India, but such a marriage was recognized by a Gurgaon court in July 2011.In order to provide protection to Beena and Savita, a runaway gay couple that received death threats from a khap panchayat, a Gurgaon court had recognized their marriage in July 2011. Since then, no one has objected to their marriage in the court. As a result, despite not being legal, the marriage has survived. Even their families and most villagers in Uttar Pradesh's Baghpat have accepted their marriage.But after Wednesday's Supreme Court verdict, which struck down the Delhi high court''s order decriminalizing homosexuality, there are question about the fate of this marriage. "The Supreme Court order needs to be reviewed," said Durgesh Bokan, advocate for Beena and Savita.Bokan told TOI that back in 2011, his only motive was to provide legal safeguard to two adults being threatened by self-proclaimed social authorities for their choices in personal lives. "The judge in the Gurgaon court had asked them to declare that they wanted to live together by choice and were not being coerced into doing so. They signed the affidavit and before the public notary and even their families didn't object to it. I met the couple as recently as April this year and they are living happily," said Bokan.The two had fled from their village and came to Gurgaon after relatives and friends opposed their relationship. A khap panchayat had declared them as outcasts and some had even vowed to "kill them". However, things changed when the villagers were told that they have married in a court.The two women knew each other since childhood. Earlier, Savita got married to a man in 2010, but their relationship did not last long. After separating, she returned to her village. That was when Savita and Beena decided to live together against all the odds. When their parents and other villagers opposed it, they ran away.After reaching Gurgaon, they signed a document in the city court, proclaiming they were in a live-in relationship.