Gay rights activists during a protest meeting after the country's top Indian court ruled that a colonial-era law criminalizing homosexuality will remain in effect in India, in Bangalore.

Gay rights activists during a protest meeting after the country's top Indian court ruled that a colonial-era law criminalizing homosexuality will remain in effect in India, in Bangalore.

A gay rights activist holds a placard during a protest meeting after the country's top Indian court ruled that a colonial-era law criminalizing homosexuality will remain in effect in India, in Bangalore, India,

Women wing of the City Congress on Saturday took strong objection to BJP leader Tejaswini's remarks that women are ill treated in Congress and those women who compromise will reach top in the party and the government. They asked for an apology from the former MP

The Independence Day celebrations in the city is facing problem as theatre personalities on Thursday opposed the district administration's move to host cultural events at Rangayana. They have warned that they will protest at the theatre repertory if the officials go ahead with their plan. However, DC C Shikha said the Kannada and culture department has directed Rangayana to allow the district administration to host the event at the theatre repertory

Police arrested six activists of People for Better Treatment for creating disturbance at Science City where Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee handed over Bangabibhusan and Bangabhusan. They protested against awarding Dr Sukumar Mukherjee, a tainted doctor, alleged Dr Kunal Saha.

The writers and Kannada activities on Thursday upped the ante in their fight for teaching the kids in their mother tongue and asked the CM Siddaramaiah to step in

P {margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0;} The Bombay High Court allowed the daughter of slain rationalist Narendra Dabholkar to intervene in a PIL seeking CBI probe into his killing.

P {margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0;} Activists are working on social networking sites to find the cruel offenders who hurt the stray dog in Mahalaxmi.

Activist Bhanvari Devi from Rajasthan will arrive in the city on March 6 evening to participate in the International Women&rsquos day celebrations to be organised by the Kerala State Women&rsquos Development Corporation. This is the first time that Bhanvari Devi, who was gang raped in 1997 for her crusade against child marriages, is visiting Thiruvananthapuram.

Environmentalist expert Vishwambhar Chaudhary; social activists Medha Patkar, Ulka Mahajan and Surekha Dalvi; Anil Avachat and Mangesh Tendulkar will come to participate in the agitaion in the coming days.

The family of RTI activist Anup Singh, who was allegedly brutalised in Noida, has fumed over local police and administration for not protecting whistle-blowers. The family - as also RTI activists - say that acts like the Lokpal or the RTI do not make any sense if protection is not given. Purusharth Aradhak