WASHINGTON: It has not been a secret in the discerning tech world or in the gay-lesbian community, but Apple CEO Tim Cook has made his homosexuality public in a powerful essay in which he said he considers being gay "among the greatest gifts God has given me.""Being gay has given me a deeper understanding of what it means to be in the minority and provided a window into the challenges that people in other minority groups deal with every day. It's made me more empathetic, which has led to a richer life. It's been tough and uncomfortable at times, but it has given me the confidence to be myself, to follow my own path, and to rise above adversity and bigotry," Cook wrote in a comment in Businessweek, two days before his 54th birthday.Cook becomes one of the highest profile CEOs and public figures to come out at a time the United States is increasingly starting to recognize the rights of the lesbian-gay-bisexual-transgender (LGBT) community. While India is still struggling to come out of the colonial closet, sexual activity between consenting adults in the US is not considered illegal since 2003, and 32 states now recognize same-sex marriages.Several public figures in India, including at least two chief ministers, are rumored to be gay, but subject is considered taboo. The US Congress has at least six openly gay and bisexual members plus a Democratic Senator who is lesbian. Obama administration itself has appointed more than 250 openly LGBT professionals to full-time and advisory positions in the executive branch, including at least two Indian-Americans -- more than all known LGBT appointments of other presidential administrations combined.Apple CEO Tim Cook (R) chats with Rupert Murdoch, executive chairman of News Corp and Chairman and CEO of 21st Century Fox, at the WSJD Live conference in Laguna Beach, California on October 27, 2014. (Reuters Photo)All this at a time when India's LGBTs are often shamed into conformist marriages because of social stigma, resulting in pain and suffering all around as illustrated in the recent case of a married woman who resorted to hidden cameras to expose her gay husband.Cook has been an intensely private man, and his brooding, single, solitary personality often triggered talk about his private life. "Throughout my professional life, I've tried to maintain a basic level of privacy. I come from humble roots, and I don't seek to draw attention to myself," he wrote in his Business Week essay. "For years, I've been open with many people about my sexual orientation. Plenty of colleagues at Apple know I'm gay, and it doesn't seem to make a difference in the way they treat me.""While I have never denied my sexuality, I haven't publicly acknowledged it either, until now. So let me be clear: I'm proud to be gay," he added, explaining that he was coming out because he was reminded of Dr Martin Luther King's words about what one is going for others and the realization that his desire for privacy was holding him back from supporting LGBT rights."I don't consider myself an activist, but I realize how much I've benefited from the sacrifice of others. So if hearing that the CEO of Apple is gay can help someone struggling to come to terms with who he or she is, or bring comfort to anyone who feels alone, or inspire people to insist on their equality, then it's worth the trade-off with my own privacy," Cook wrote.