Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community and their supporters gathered for the city's fourth annual LGBT pride parade on Sunday.

Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights activists have welcomed the preliminary position paper drawn by 200 bishops at the Vatican synod but also feel that it won't make a huge difference to the community.

Same-sex couples will soon be able to wed in up to 30 US states after the Supreme Court on Monday declined to consider — for now — a nationwide ruling on the divisive issue.

Gay marriage is now legal in Arizona after the state's conservative attorney general said Friday that he wouldn't challenge a federal court decision that cleared the way for same-sex unions in the state.

Gay rights groups are cautiously cheering a shift in tone from the Catholic Church toward homosexuals, encouraged that Pope Francis' famous "Who am I to judge?"

never the biggest problem for this group anyway.Staying in school.

Narendra Modi’s visit to Washington provides a golden opportunity for the United States and India to redirect their meandering relationship.

Apple CEO Tim Cook has made his homosexuality public in a powerful essay in which he said he considers being gay "among the greatest gifts God has given me."

The first week of December will witness the Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender (LGBT) community in the city coming together for a two-day 'Gujarat LGBT Pride Festival' for raising awareness and celebrating the rights of the LGBT community. The festival will be hosted by Gujarat LGBT Pride Festival Foundation in association with Rangrez and Foram Foundation.

The parade committee said the new policy was aimed at welcoming lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender groups while staying true to the teachings of the Catholic Church as the parade moves into its 253rd year.

Commemorating the 30th year of November 1984 anti-Sikh riots, leaders and activists of various Sikh bodies led by Dal Khalsa, Damdami Taksal and SAD (Panch Pardani) undertook a long march under the banner of 'Rights and Justice March'

Hundreds of Ludhianvis turned up to spread word about Cancer by participating in the Second Annual Cancer Awareness Walkathon organised by Can Fight Cancer (CFC), an NGO involved in spreading awareness against cancer and spreading message of early detection here on Sunday.

A joint flag march was conducted by the army and the Mumbai Police at Mahim West on Saturday morning. The idea was to instil confidence in people in the run up to the state polls.  Sparkle your Diwali.. 8 pm onwards only on Romedy NOW.

In order to inspire confidence among the people ahead of the state assembly polls scheduled for October 15, police personnel from Borivali and Dindoshi held flag marches on Wednesday. Sparkle your Diwali.. 8 pm onwards only on Romedy NOW.

LMC has organised a morning march for students of different schools in all six zones on Oct 1 at 8 am with the help of principals and DIOS. Zonal officer will take care of the arrangements for the march.  Prominent landmarks have been identified to start of the march at different places. The objective of the march is to inculcate clean garbage disposal habits among students.  Watch the Indian TV Premiere of RUSH Sunday 1PM and 9 PM only on MOVIES NOW.

Balasore district police as well as paramilitary forces jointly conducted a flag march in Balasore town and Basta to give a boost to the morale and instill confidence of the people. "We have planned similar practice in the coming days," Balasore SP Awinash Kumar said.

Charging Narendra Modi government with not fulfilling the promises made before coming to power at the Centre, Congress has decided to take out protest marches across all the district headquarters of UP on September 2, the day NDA completes its 100 days in office.

The students of  Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University ( GADVASU ) are to take out a march  starting from the University gate at 10 am tomorrow morning. Political parties and NGO's all in their support.  ET NOW turns 5. Watch No1 Biz News Channel of India for unbiased coverage of Markets and Economy.