An Indian gay-rights activist shouts slogans during a protest against the Supreme Court ruling reinstating a ban on gay sex in Bangalore on December 11, 2013.

An Indian gay-rights activist takes part in a protest against the Supreme Court ruling reinstating a ban on gay sex in Kolkata on December 11, 2013.

An Indian gay-rights activist takes part in a protest against the Supreme Court ruling reinstating a ban on gay sex in Kolkata on December 11, 2013. India's Supreme Court reinstated a colonial-era ban on gay sex on that could see homosexuals jailed for up to ten years in a major setback for rights campaigners in the world's biggest democracy.

LDA said that there would be over 300 properties in Lucknow which are bypassing fire-safety measures and ignoring parking rules. Most commercial buildings have made shops in basements instead of parking space while in residential apartments, builder have ignored fire safety norms.  These exist not only in outskirts but also in main market places like Chowk, Charbagh, Hazratganj, Gomtinagar etc.  Vijay Karnataka, 15 years of trust, of truth, of winning, of excitement and of celebration.

The Kolkata Municipal Corporation building department has decided to offer sops for those who need to make small additional constructions on their existing buildings. This facility will be extended to house owners who have two and three storeyed buildings, a KMC building department official said on Saturday.

President rule in Andhra Pradesh has been revoked as new government headed by N Chandrababu Naidu has taken over.

The Karnataka High Court on Thursday upheld the validity and legality of the rule introduced by the Bar Council of India (BCI)  barring candidates who have obtained 10+2 or graduation/post-graduation certificates through open universities system directly (without having any basic qualification)from getting admission to law courses.

With a view to ensure security and safety of the residents, especially during night, Haryana Town and Country Planning Department has notified policy guidelines for granting permission to erect security gates in the licensed colonies in the State.

He said there was no need for  BJP leaders to speak   politics at religious functions and jatras, but they are unnecessarily dragging politics into religion . " What kind of warning they issue to us when we have not thought of such a legislation"? he asked dubbing  BJP leaders rhetoric as election oriented.

Siddaramaiah said it is a fact that   the   government was planning to bring in a legislation to control and check the superstitious beliefs in the society and orthodox practices

Speaking at a   function   organized as a part of   Suttur jatra celebrations   where he inaugurated a newly built guest house   said   criticism of the BJP leaders   was unfounded and the state government has no such thinking in its mind

State minister for Muzrai and endowment Prakash Hukkeri had stated on the floor of the house last week that   government is planning     to bring in a law which allows the control of the mutts and Hindu religious institutes whose control hitherto rests with the mutts and these institute heads

Chief minister Siddaramaiah on Sunday backtracked on the issue of government bringing   in a law to control the mutts and other Hindu religious institutes in the state   and declared that his government has no intention   to take control of the mutts and other Hindu religious institutes in the state