NEW DELHI: Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) rights activists have welcomed the preliminary position paper drawn by 200 bishops at the Vatican synod but also feel that it won't make a huge difference to the community.Some call the Catholic Church's recognition that homosexuals have "gifts and qualities to offer" patronizing and that it doesn't recognize their intrinsic rights.Others say this should translate into a change in attitude of the clergy towards homosexual people who often seek spiritual support or counselling. Nevertheless, most believe this shift in stand may ensure acceptance of the LGBT community and is a major step forward."They are saying queer people have gifts. It's like saying don't hate the sinner but hate the sin. Recognizing talent is not more important than recognizing rights. They are continuing to exorcise the community and I feel the attitude towards queer people is very patronizing," said Rituparna Borah, an activist and member of Nirantar, Centre for Gender and Education. She added that every person has gifts, why single out homosexuals?Ashok Row Kavi, chairperson of Humsafar Trust, felt it was encouraging of the Vatican to appreciate the contributions of the LGBT community but the guilt and shame imposed on the community by religious organizations is unacceptable."By saying homosexuality is a sin and unnatural, clergy was creating enormous self-hatred and lack of self worth among people from the community. In fact, one of the main reasons behind the high suicide rates among LGBT people is be cause of religion's lack of acceptance."Kavi added — "spiritual counselling is supposed to help people lead better lives. Young people need priests who can teach them to be socially productive and not spiritually broken. If God exists, he will not judge you for your sexual orientation."Some said that the move might change how people view the community."To imagine that the Church will change its stance on sexuality completely and accept same-sex unions is a long way to go. But I believe now there will be more acceptance and less violence against homosexual people. There will be more compassion. It can also ensure more economic and educational opportunities for LGBT people as religion is accepting them," said Sanjay Malhotra, director of Indjapink, a gay men's travel company.Some hoped the move may address the plight of the community after SC upheld section 377 in 2013 that criminalizes same sex unions in India."It makes a difference to us. When an old religious institution is coming to accept the human aspect of homosexuality it'll impact people's views. Especially when many feel homosexuality is due to western influence. I think it'll help the movement," added Sharif Rangnekar, communications professional.