NEW DELHI: The (likely forced) resignation of Mozilla CEO Brendan Eich has sparked a debate on the definition and limits of free speech with some in the world of technology calling his ouster unfair while a few others saying that justice was done.Eich, who co-founded Mozilla and worked extensively on Firefox browser, "resigned" on Thursday night after controversy over his $1,000 donation to an organization that was campaigning against same-sex marriage in California in 2008. He is also the inventor of JavaScript, a technology widely used on the web.After Mozilla said on Thursday night that Eich would resign, OkCupid, an online dating site that had asked its users to boycott Firefox, welcomed the move. "We are pleased that OkCupid's boycott has brought tremendous awareness to the critical matter of equal rights for all partnerships," the firm tweeted. "Today's decision reaffirms Mozilla's commitment to that cause. We are satisfied that Mozilla will be taking a number of further steps."Electronics Frontier Foundation too seemed pleased. It said, "EFF has been following the discussions around the choice of Brendan Eich as Mozilla's CEO, including the announcement that he is stepping down. As partners to Mozilla ... we appreciate the frank and honest discussion that the community has undergone over this issue and respect the openness of the process."The tweets saying that Mozilla did the right thing and that the company would be "now supported" came in from many directions on Twitter. A hashtag - #StandWithMozilla - was started by those who supported the company in the wake of Eich's resignation.But at the same time there were many people with dissenting views, calling the "ouster" unfair.Andrew Sullivan, an influential blogger who is also gay, wrote a strongly-worded post titled "The Hounding Of A Heretic"."The guy who had the gall to express his First Amendment rights and favor Prop 8 in California by donating $1,000 has just been scalped by some gay activists," wrote Sullivan. "Will he now be forced to walk through the streets in shame? Why not the stocks? The whole episode disgusts me - as it should disgust anyone interested in a tolerant and diverse society."The debate was centred on the concept of free speech and many Silicon Valley influencers took the position that Eich was hounded out from a professional post for his personal beliefs.Michael Arrington, an influential blogger who started TechCrunch and is now a venture capitalist, tweeted, "Congratulations, Mozilla, you burned a witch today."Marco Arment, co-founder of Tumblr and creator of InstaPaper app, however, defended Mozilla."Beliefs and 'views' deserve no inherent protection, validity, or value to the rest of society simply because they're political or religious. They're just opinions, and just as many opinions are worth considering and discussing, many others are offensive, crazy, ignorant, or bigoted," Arment wrote in a blog post. "Eich's right to free speech entitles him to express any opinion he pleases. But it does not shield him from the personal and professional repercussions of what he says."