NEW DELHI: LGBT activists as well as liberals and progressives who were distressed by Supreme Court's order re-criminalizing consensual homosexuality found solid backing from the political class, routinely slammed for being conservative and out of step with changing mores.Defying their reputation as status quoists and a bunch wary of offending sensitivities for the fear of losing votes, political parties expressed concern over the setback for those practicing alternative sexuality and insisting on freedom of choice and privacy: in what marked a big step in the transition towards a liberal society.Parties as diverse as Congress and CPM and JD(U) expressed solidarity with the LGBT community's demand for doing away with Section 377 of the IPC so that they are treated as equals. CPM's Brinda Karat criticized the judgment as retrograde, and the bench for tossing the matter in the executive's court when it has not flinched from intervening directly on other issues. JD(U)'s Shivanand Tiwari took an equally dim view of the order, terming it "regressive".Even in the case of parties like the BJP and Trinamool Congress that refrained from spelling out their stand, individual members stepped forward to express solidarity with the LGBT community and the principle of individual freedom. "In the modern age, every individual has the freedom of choice, and we should respect it. There is nothing 'unnatural' in these relationships and I hope that the subject is reviewed/law amended at the earliest," said BJP's Rajya Sabha MP Piyush Goel, one of the first to have blogged on the matter.More importantly, speaking on the condition of anonymity, many members of the BJP argued for de-criminalizing homosexuality. "The issue deals with the lifestyle choice of individuals. There is no criminality involved," a leader said. Another party member said Hindu society has "traditionally been tolerant of non-conformism and can easily accommodate those who don't subscribe to the dominant view of sexuality".Yet another party MP said homosexuality cannot be considered unnatural given that people are born with alternative sexual proclivities. Considering that BJP prides itself as the custodian of traditional Hindu culture, these murmurs may appear to be coming-of-the-age moment for the party insofar as its stand on alternative sexuality is concerned.Trinamool Congress boss Mamata Banerjee refused to comment on the matter and said there was no need for political parties to get into it. However, Trinamool MP Derek O'Brien came out in support of those distressed by the judgment. "Way back in 2006, I spoke up to decriminalize Section 377 (homosexuality) along with Amartya Sen, Vikram Seth, Shyam Bengal and others. My views on gay rights is no different today," he said.Congress spokesperson Sandeep Dikshit reiterated his party's support for government's stand for de-criminalizing homosexuality. "G E Vahanvati made a statement in the Supreme Court where he had clearly stated that government supports what the Delhi government has done and we support the government's point of view."Rural development minister Jairam Ramesh was also critical of the order. "Personally, I think it is a retrograde judgment and it has done no justice to a modern liberal India. If two consenting men and two consenting women... why should be illegal. It is choice issue... Personal choice... it is a liberal society, a modern society... a society that gives choice to individual... suddenly if it is illegal?" the rural development minister said.Congress MP Milind Deora said, "The same SC that was so wise yesterday on lal battis (red beacon) has disappointed us today with its verdict on Section 377. It is about personal choice, SC."CPM went a step further, with politburo member Brinda Karat criticizing the SC verdict. "SC order today is completely retrograde. Criminalizing alternative sexuality is wrong," she said, adding that government should have scrapped Section 377 after Delhi HC decriminalized homosexuality among consenting adults.Karat also said the court was selective in throwing the ball in Parliament's court in this instance when it has intervened directly in so many matters.JD(U)'s Shivanand Tiwari called the SC order "regressive". "SC must review it. I think the Delhi HC order was practical and constitutional. This happens in society and if people believed that it was natural for them, why is the SC coming in the way."CPI's national secretary D Raja reacted to the controversial verdict by saying, "No legislation should become an instrument of criminalization. The judgment should be examined."NCP's D P Tripathi was cagey about taking a position, saying Parliament could override the SC order if it so willed. "It is for Parliament to make a law. Parliament can discuss the verdict and can change the law accordingly."Civil rights group Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights also expressed disappointment at the development, calling it a body blow to the rights of the LGBT community.However, Vinod Bansal of the VHP supported the Supreme Court ruling. "Supreme Court has upheld what are the cultural values of this country. In fact, we feel that is no need to change the law to protect the rights of those who violate the existing law," he said.