NEW DELHI: They fought together for LGBT rights, and now that a Supreme Court judgment has recognized transgenders (the 'T' in LGBT) as a third gender, the gay and lesbian community is hopeful that new laws on transgenders will help in decriminalizing homosexuality."The new judgment states that there should be no discrimination on gender and sexual orientation," said Shaleen Rakesh, a manager with the '207 Against 377' campaign that has brought together 207 organizations from 17 states against the order upholding Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code that makes consensual homosexual intercourse an offence.While lesbians, gays and bisexuals (LGBs) have welcomed the judgment on transgenders, they feel left out. Activists say there is a contradiction between the latest SC judgment and Article 377. "Making homosexuality illegal causes exclusion and discrimination," said Rakesh, adding that the contradiction could help in amending the anti-homosexuality law. "Under the law now, homosexual acts are illegal, but not having a same-sex partner."But Shobhna S Kumar, a lesbian social worker and entrepreneur from Mumbai, said the judgment on transgenders might not help them. "I'm not sure it would help, so we aren't celebrating yet." Even Ashok Row Kavi, a senior gay rights activist, is skeptical and says Tuesday's SC judgment has left him bitter. "The judges should have referred directly to criminalization of homosexuality," said Kavi, adding, "Section 377 has been brushed aside and we remain what we are".Although LGBs might number in the millions in India, the Supreme Court described them as a minuscule fraction of the country's population in December. Kavi said homosexuals don't want special rights, such as reservations, but equality. "As there is no recognition of gay relationships, a person who has been in one for years cannot inherit or even see the body of their dead partner," he said.Organizers of the '207 Against 377' campaign have already run 15 state-level consultations on gay rights. The latest, in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, included stakeholders, parliamentarians, lawyers, as well as members of the state governments. "We want to stress that even under the current legal system the state should provide protection for lesbians, gays and bisexuals, and protect them from discrimination," said Rakesh.