Rajkot city police and Social Defense department officials prevented a child marriage in city. Vijay Karnataka, 15 years of trust, of truth, of winning, of excitement and of celebration.

Barriers to gay marriage fell on Friday in Arizona, Alaska and Wyoming following a series of federal court actions, in the latest in a series of legal victories for supporters of same-sex matrimony in America.

Gay marriage is now legal in Arizona after the state's conservative attorney general said Friday that he wouldn't challenge a federal court decision that cleared the way for same-sex unions in the state.

An Egyptian court jailed eight men for three years on Saturday over a video prosecutors claimed was of a gay wedding, which went viral on the internet.

Gay marriage advocates won another two victories on Wednesday as the US Supreme Court allowed Kansas to become the 33rd US state where same-sex couples can wed and a federal judge struck down South Carolina's ban.

French President Francois Hollande insisted on Sunday that a gay marriage law was increasingly being accepted, after his predecessor Nicolas Sarkozy called for the highly divisive law to be scrapped.

The US Supreme Court declined on Monday to hear gay marriage cases from five states, opening the door to more same-sex weddings while putting off a nationwide decision on the hot-button issue.

Same-sex couples will soon be able to wed in up to 30 US states after the Supreme Court on Monday declined to consider — for now — a nationwide ruling on the divisive issue.

The move came as barriers to gay marriage fell state by state this week, from Nevada to North Carolina, and followed days of back-and-forth federal court actions that could soon see legal weddings for same-sex couples extended to 35 states.

The nikah ceremony of 17 Muslim couples organised by Bearys Welfare Forum, Abu Dhabi will be held at Milagres Hall, Hampankatta here on October 18. Thwaka Ahmed Musliar, khazi of Mangalore will solemnise the nikah.

Angered by a youth from other caste and villager eloping the girl from village and later marrying her in high court, villagers of Machiyan Khurd allegedly beat his family members and also kidnapped his sister and took her to their own village from her village Machiyan Kalaan.

Shree Geeta Bhavan Trust will organize its fifth annual mass marriage for differently abled .The last date for submitting apllications is July 31 and the marriage will be organized on November Application be down loaded from: www.geetabhavantrust.com/ www.hfctmatri.com  and can also be collected from Shree Geeta Bhavan.

Italy based Claudio Astuto and Laura D' Oriano are likely to tie tying the nuptial knot in Sangam city on Wednesday by Hindu tradition.   Watch election news on TIMES NOW No.1 Eng News Channel of India. Do not miss it till Result Day May 16

The Kateel Gopalakrishna Asranna Trust and Laxminarayana Asranna Felicitation Committee jointly will organise a mass marriage function at Kateel Gopalakrishna Asranna Sabha Bhavan at Kateel near here on May 5 during the auspicious godhuli lagna.

Social Defense Department officials have prevented child-marriage on outskirts of the city. Watch election news on TIMES NOW No.1 Eng News Channel of India. Do not miss it till Result Day May 16

Around a dozen calls for child marriages were received at the child's panel on Akshaya Tritiya here on Friday. Besides, the women empowerment directorate too stopped more than 40 child marriages.

The 43rd annual mass marriage organised by Sri Kshetra Dharmasthala on May 2 that saw 142 couples enter in to wedlock in the auspicious 'Goudhuli' lagna profession wise included 58 labourers, 27 in private jobs, 19 working as drivers, 15 as agriculturists and the rest in other jobs.

The 43rd annual mass marriage organised by Sri Kshetra Dharmasthala on May 2 that saw 142 couples enter in to wedlock in the auspicious 'Goudhuli' lagna included 11 inter-caste marriages.

The 43rd annual mass marriage organised by Sri Kshetra Dharmasthala on May 2 saw 142 couples enter in to wedlock in the auspicious 'Goudhuli' lagna. Minister for youth empowerment, sports, and fisheries K Abhayachandra Jain blessed the newly weds.

A youth from rural Mysore who married a girl outside his caste on Monday has sought police protection from their opposing parents and community leaders. District police have given them security cover and warned parents not to trouble the young couple

Officials from various government departments have effectively stalled the marriage of a minor girl that was scheduled to be held at Marpady village in Moodbidri near here on April 13.

A man refuses to marry seconds before the marriage was to be solemnised at Hanamkonda in Warangal district. The relatives of the bride attack the groom and hand him over to the police