NEW DELHI: When theatre actor and gay rights activist Sharif Rangnekar wrote a song on homosexuality last month, the Supreme Court verdict on Wednesday was the last thing on his mind. Called Head Held High, the song's initial version or "rough cut" was recently sent out to close friends for feedback. After the verdict, which criminalizes homosexuality, was delivered, the number has come to be shared widely over email and mobile messaging app Whatsapp. Rangnekar says that he too received the song over message from a friend, who was unaware that he had himself written it."We were so confident of the High Court ruling to be upheld. A lot of people in the community were closely following the case in the Supreme Court hearings, but no one expected this. The HC judgment empowered a lot of people and gave them confidence. This has come as a big shock, and has frankly made me very angry," says Rangnekar, who recalls his mother threw a party for him and his friends when the 2009 Delhi Court order reading down Section 377 of IPC was passed.His song, invoking Tagore's "Where the head is held high", talks about discovering one's sexual orientation. It begins with "Where the mind is not clear/ And you are wondering why/ Cause they look at you strangely/ And condition your life," says the opening stanza of the song. It eventually comes to a moment of clarity and realization. "As the mind is now clear/ And I stand for my rights/ It's not about lust /Or love or a cry," read the lyrics."A lot of young gay people don't know they are gay and are confused for a long time. Once they realize that they are gay, they become more confident and begin to seek their rights," says Rangnekar, explaining the sentiment behind the song. As for now, he is waiting for a review petition to be filed in court, though he expects slow change, if any, from society. "After the High Court judgment, many people who are sensitive about gender rights had become more open to us. But there can't be complete change in society so soon. People did suffer then too, especially with religious groups supporting the law," says Rangnekar.