A Gurgaon court has recognised a same-sex marriage, but the LGBT frat is sceptical as it's still not 'legal'.

If not anything else, it's raising awareness

This is just a small step, there's much more to deal with

Most would have expected it to be 'big news', but the opposite happened when a runaway lesbian couple, Beena and Savita, (from Khekada village in Baghpat) was given recognition of their marriage by a Gurgaon court, along with police protection. Unlike the recent legal nod given to same-sex marriages in New York, which was followed by widespread celebration and fanfare, gay parades with jubilant posters, outrageous costumes and overwhelming euphoria, LGBT activists and lawyers here seem barely optimistic about the development.Even though same-sex marriages have no legal status in India, it's still "a step forward," says Parul, a publisher who works closely with LGBT authors and activists. "I'm glad that this development took place," she says. Ditto for Monish, a key member of the Delhi Queer Pride Committee, "I read the news in passing and all I have to say is that such weddings are still not recognised by the law. The Delhi High Court simply decriminalised homosexuality, but as far as marriages go, that's still illegal."For gay rights activist Vikram Doctor, the question of this event being anything like New York's doesn't even arise. Says he, "The reason why it was low-key as opposed to the NYC gay marriages is because these girls could be killed. This happens all the time. There are horrible consequences like couples' suicides. There are so many cases where people of the same sex who love each other, run away and the families have tracked them down and filed cases. These girls should be given protection; otherwise their lives are in danger. And most of all, the Supreme Court should uphold the High Court verdict of decriminalising homosexuality, which was a huge step for the community, as parents of the individuals couldn't file charges."Same-sex marriages are not allowed legally in India. But since I have not seen the court's directive in this case, I cannot comment on this. However, these girls should be given protection, because in many cases we see a lot of girls who run away from home to be with each other, and they're under tremendous family pressure. There have been cases of violence too.Vijay Hiremath, lawyerI haven't read much about this case, but I feel that in the USA, gay marriages are upheld as a legal state institution which has many benefits, which won't be the case in India even if same-sex marriages are legalised. So legally speaking, it won't make much of a difference because people will not somehow truly accept it. Marriage, between a man and a woman or between two men and two women, is a symbol of commitment and family values and that is more important than how society thinks.Vivek RavunniarathI read this online a day ago and this sparked off many discussions across forums and one person said that according to Hindu law, marriage is between a husband and a wife, and it didn't define whether the partners are one male and a female. So if two people of the same sex decide to take on the role of a husband and wife, it should be perfectly fine. I think this Gurgaon case has been a huge step forward for the community, and protection must be given, as it is a question of human rights. I also think that the more we talk of this, the more awareness it will create and changes will come.Tushar MI am very happy. My father woke me up when he read the news in the morning and asked me if I had seen the article. So you see, this is not just about homosexual people, but also their families. The marriage may not be valid but it speaks volumes in terms of social acceptance. It's a step ahead. We are just moving ahead one step at a time, I welcome the fact that the judge did not raise an eyebrow when told that the two women were married. This ruling cannot be compared to the New York one. And just the fact that the Gurgaon judge did not question the validity of the wedding is not reason enough to celebrate. There are still cases pending in the Supreme Court regarding section 377. We have to fight those battles first. Though I am optimistic about what happened, there are other more important problems we are still dealing with like harassment at work place, property rights, insurance, the HIV bill that needs to be passed by the Parliament. We have to keep in mind that this was not a judgement and a court saying a simple OK when the women said they were married. It's just a small step towards what we are trying to achieve.Vivek Anand of Hamsafar Trust