KOLKATA: The Supreme Court overturning a high court verdict that decriminalized gay sex last month had triggered a barrage of protests from the LGBT community. Different organizations and the public at large had openly supported the community in the fight for their rights. And now, taking the support a step ahead, Apeejay School Park Street, in collaboration with theatre group Part Time Lovers, is organizing an Inter School Theatre Festival on January 27 and 28 at Mohorkunja.City schools have started registering in the Street Play Competition and they will perform on gender sensitization. The competition has been titled 'I am What I Am'.Part Time Lovers director, actor and singer Rijita Chatterjee explained the rules and techniques of Street Play to the students and teachers present in a workshop session earlier this week with her co-actor Maruf Ali Sheik and Arnab Moitra, the music arranger, by her side. During the workshop, she stressed on Side Specific Theatre, which pertains to the location or the space that a character is being given to express his or her thought. Besides dialogue, the play should include music, dance and expression. "On the whole, it has to be a musical street play," she stressed.Participating schools have been allotted 15 minutes for their presentation (10 minutes for performance and 5 minutes for stage preparation). Though teachers are allowed to participate in the competition, the play should be written and directed by students of the participating schools and scripts should be submitted by January 18 for selection. Six students per school have to perform on stage with two in the backstage for help. No recorded music can be played during the performance.On January 20, another workshop session will be organized during school hours for students at Apeejay School. "People belonging to the LGBT community should be supported and allowed to live normally," pointed out Chatterjee. "We have received positive feedback from premier city schools and I hope the students will live up to our expectation," she added. Around 25 schools have already registered their names for the competition and more are expected to chip in.