GUWAHATI: The city finally woke up to recognize the need to protect the rights of the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) community on Sunday and witnessed a clarion call for removal of Section 377 from the IPC.About 50 people, both straight and gay, gathered at Dighilipukhuri to protest against the Supreme Court's decision to recriminalize homosexuality. Even though some are brave enough to have attended the event, they didn't want to talk to the media or be identified. Many others remain in the closet for fear of social censure."There were homosexuals in Sunday's event but they are afraid to openly proclaim their sexual orientation. No one can take away their rights. We respect the apex court but the decision is not justified. The ball is now in the Centre's court," said Migeul Queah, rights activist.It may be a small start but the event is likely to go down in history as the first protest for social equality and creating awareness about homosexuality in the city. Those present at the event made a common plea to the Centre to take positive steps to ensure equal rights for the LGBT community. Artists, theatre personalities, human rights activists and other civil society members observed Sunday as the Global Day of Rage, as a mark of protest against the Supreme Court's decision."There are many organizations associated with the Sunday protest. The event was held simultaneously in Delhi, Nagpur, Kolkata and several other cities in the country. Prior to this, no one talked openly about the issue in Guwahati. There is hardly any space for members of the community and people are afraid to speak about their sexual preferences, leave alone assert it. We want to change the scenario," said Bonomallika Choudhury, organizer of the protest in the city and a social activist.Ditopi Dutta from Dhemaji said life for members of the LGBT community in rural Assam is even worse as homosexuality is considered a crime in these places."I closely work with homosexuals. In Delhi, I took part in pride marches. The event is not about how many people are taking part but about creating a support base. There is this notion that homosexuality is against nature. If we do not talk about it, it will never be considered an important issue. There are homosexuals in the Assamese society and we cannot deny their existence any longer," said Dutta.