Multinationals to lend their support to this year's Bangalore Gay Pride MarchIn a positive turn of events, six international corporations are associating themselves with the Pride March to take place in Bangalore next month on December 2. Samuel Konnur, organizer of the Bangalore Pride event, says, "This is the first time we will see bigwigs throwing their weight behind the cause. And in a first, some service-based and IT-enabled services companies will participate in the Pride March. This will also help battle homophobia at work."According to Samuel, this year's attendance from the corporate sector is pegged at 150. While supporting the gay rights movement is often dubbed as another PR\CSR activity by a set of industry insiders, diversity specialist Priya Chetty-Rajgopal feels otherwise. "It is definitely not a PR activity. In fact, the LGBT community is in the same space as women (who were discriminated against), who form a formidable part of the workforce today. They feel diluted, under-leveraged and under-appreciated. When a company takes a positive step, it says we support your orientation and embrace you holistically. Companies in India are trying to internalize a global mandate. And by doing so, they are creating a safer environment for sexual minorities and supporting them," she says.Agrees Samuel, who says, "The corporate groups wear their company tees and sometimes they even sell T-shirts, but most do not believe in advertising their companies."A spokesperson for a web tools company says there is no economic or brand motivation behind walking on the wild side as allies. "We strive to be a company where each employee can be exactly who they are at work. We believe that a diverse workforce is important to bring about innovation and creativity in thought and cater to our users who come from all walks of life. The Gayglers India network is one of our most active and engaged employee resource groups. Our initiatives are aimed at creating an inclusive work environment by sensitizing our employees and increasing awareness on LGBT issues."Vasu Nagaraj, India Head of the Inclusion and Diversity cell of a leading IT firm, explains how India Inc is championing the cause of gay rights. "It's the cultural implications that must be understood at the workplace. Just like cross-culture sensitization, gender issues are equally important. Like with sexual harassment at the workplace, the company has added a gay-friendly policy to promote an ethos of acceptance," he says. His company will represent the Pride March with a "large group" and the registrations are already under way.Krishan N, an HR Manager with an MNC who will be participating in the Pride March, seconds the view. "Globally, the company already has a charter that focuses on education and developing allies. In India, certain moves have been made towards sensitization of sexual minorities. The company allows flexi-working and, based on prior intimation, allows employees to participate in activities that support the rainbow cause," he says.Vishnu C, who works with a leading American computer manufacturer, adds, "Such activities do have an impact on employees', morale and make them feel included."(Some names have been changed on request)