NEW DELHI: Senior counsel Anand Grover will move an application on Monday before the Chief Justice of India seeking to take into account the recent Supreme Court judgment creating the "third gender" status for transgenders while considering the curative petition filed by gay rights activists against its verdict criminalizing homosexuality.Grover, counsel for petitioner NGO Naz Foundation, said he will move the application on Monday morning, a day before the apex court is scheduled to consider the plea for an open court hearing on the curative petition, which contended that there was an error in the judgment delivered on December 11 last year as it was based on an old law."I am making an application to Chief Justice of India to request that when on Tuesday he decides whether the Koushal judgment (upholding Section 377 IPC that criminalizes consensual gay sex) should be reopened and an open hearing should be granted or not, he takes into consideration the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) judgment (creating legal rights for transgenders)," Grover said.Grover was one of the speakers at an event organized by India HIV/AIDS Alliance and Delhi Queer Pride to celebrate the victory for transgender rights. Hundreds of transgenders, members of the LGBT community and supporters gathered at Jantar Mantar on Saturday evening in a show of strength. They called for the decriminalization of homosexuality and protection of the rights of all minorities.The three-hour long programme was a fine balance of music, dance and discussion on the human rights of the sexual minority. At the helm of the affairs was transgender rights activist and petitioner in the NALSA case, Laxmi Narayan Tripathi, who regaled the crowd and enthused over the recent victory. "We will not accept defeat. Today, we have a reason to clap our hearts out. However, the struggle continues. We will fight till we get our rights," Laxmi said.A surprise guest at the event was Swami Agnivesh, a social activist, who supported the LGBT movement and invoked the Vedas. "We will fight till we achieve our rights. It is written in the Vedas that every man is equal and no discrimination should be done on the basis of caste, creed or sex. The SC has upheld the Vedas," he said.Amid the celebrations, Grover told the crowd that the NALSA judgment was an important victory not only for transgenders but also for the LGBTI movement. "The judgment says there will be no discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity, which means that it has now open the door to challenge the Koushal judgment," he said.