Several gay couples lined up early on Monday in Alaska to apply for marriage licenses after a federal judge struck down the state's ban on same-sex unions.

Barriers to gay marriage fell on Friday in Arizona, Alaska and Wyoming following a series of federal court actions, in the latest in a series of legal victories for supporters of same-sex matrimony in America.

Gay marriage is now legal in Arizona after the state's conservative attorney general said Friday that he wouldn't challenge a federal court decision that cleared the way for same-sex unions in the state.

Gay marriage advocates won another two victories on Wednesday as the US Supreme Court allowed Kansas to become the 33rd US state where same-sex couples can wed and a federal judge struck down South Carolina's ban.

A US federal court swept away bans on same-sex marriage in five more US states on Tuesday, bringing the number where gay weddings are permissible, or soon will be, to 35.

Women are more likely to watch same-sex porn videos than heterosexual porn videos, says an interesting study, adding that women watch more porn than men.

The move came as barriers to gay marriage fell state by state this week, from Nevada to North Carolina, and followed days of back-and-forth federal court actions that could soon see legal weddings for same-sex couples extended to 35 states.

The special mobile squad of Kasaragod police arrested a sub inspector of police on the charge of sexually abusing a dalit woman. According to police, they arrested Sugunan, the grade SI at Adoor police station, on the basis of the complaint by a dalit woman that he sexually abused her and made her pregnant. Sugunan was later produced in the local court in Kasaragod, which sent him in judicial remand till November 25.

About a fortnight after a 34-year-old teacher was booked for allegedly sexually abusing a minor boy of Sham Nagar area following the efforts of Bachpan Bachao Andolan, an NGO of Noble Peace Prize Winner Kailash Satyarthi , police is yet to arrest the accused in the case.

Social service unit of crime branch has on Monday arrested Vishal Jaiswal after raiding a Duplex bungalow at Sahu Nagar on Besa Road where the culprit allegedly has been engaged in operating a sex trade racket. A victim girl, native of Gwalior, has been also rescued during the raid. Time for The Big Reset. Decode Budget 2014 with the best experts on ET NOW. 7am onwards on 10th July

P {margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0;} Social service wing of crime branch swooped down on the fourth floor of an apartment in Ganeshpeth on Saturday busting a sex racket. Apart from arresting a couple for operating the racket, police team has also rescued two girls who were forced to work for the material gain of the culprits.

Peoples' Union for Civil Liberties has filed a complaint with the Karnataka State Human Rights Commission, on behalf of sex workers who are being subjected to police violence in Majestic, Upparpete KG Road and adjoining areas in Bangalore.

The principal district and session judge Mohan Sripad Sankolli on Friday asked the officials of the health and family welfare to conduct raids like Lokayukta police to curb sex determination tests