MUMBAI: Gay rights activists have expressed dismay at the Supreme Court's rejection of their review plea on Section 377. After the 2009 Delhi HC order which decriminalized gay sex, activists say, a lot of people had come out of the closet."The order had given hope to the community and their family members that they will be treated equally. After 2009, a lot of people had told their families about their sexual preferences. Today's decision has come as a rude shock to all of us,'' said Anjan Joshi, gay rights activist and member of SPACE organization, which works with the LGBT com-munity."It's not just the LGBT community but also straight people who find the decision problematic," said Parmesh Shahani of Mumbai's Godrej Culture club.Rights activists, including NAZ Foundation, are planning to file a curative petition in which the petitioner is allowed to cite the grounds which had been pointed out in the review petition filed earlier. "It is unfortunate. The court didn't look into our review petition in proper perspective. We had given a lot of reasons for the petition to be reconsidered," said Anand Grover, senior advocate, Supreme Court, and counsel for NAZ.The LGBT community has started strategizing on the future course of action now that many have made known their sexual preference. "Now there is no looking back. It took us a lot of time to come out in open and also talk about the harassment faced by our community members. WHO has said that it is not a disease and even the psychiatrists say that this is natural. And we have the right to live freely and without fear. We will fight it out,'' said Manish Sharma, member of the Delhi queer pride committee. The committee plans a protest march to voice its concerns and also mobilize members of the community.Senior advocate Harish Salve tweeted, "SC has dismissed a review petition against the Sec. 377 petition. Unsurprising. Why did the govt which felt so strongly not change the law? Cases that affect questions of constitutional law of monumental importance HAVE to be heard by 5 judges. Govt did not raise this when the case was being heard. The wisdom of the constitution envisaged 5 judges so that five minds in the least were applied to such issues."