NEW DELHI: Author Vikram Seth and Nobel laureate Amartya Sen are leading a group of activists seeking de-criminalisation of gay sex between consenting adults and demanding a repeal of Section 377 of IPC, which prescribes punishments for gays.

In open letters to the Government of India, the group, which has several actors and social activists, said Section 377, by making same-sex relations a crime, violates fundamental human rights of gay and bisexual men and women.

"It is disgraceful that Section 377 has on several recent occasions been used by officials to suppress the work of legitimate HIV-prevention groups, leaving gay and bisexual men even more defenceless," said Seth in his letter released on Saturday at the launch of a campaign in Delhi.

Economist Amartya Sen, in a separate letter of support to the campaign, stated that criminalisation of gay behaviour

also curbed the enhancement of human freedoms.

Officials of UNAIDS say there is no data on the gay population in India as even collecting such information is illegal under Section 377.

"The only estimates available are those of National Aids Control Organisation and that, too, of only those gay or bisexual people who constitute the high risk group — which means having more than one sexual partner," said UNAIDS country coordinator Denis Broun.

Though discussing issues like consensual sex, technically speaking, continue to be illegal, one of the panelists at a discussion to launch the campaign was a member of Planning Commission.

Syeda Hameed, who represents the health section of the Commission, in trying to capture the government's dilemma, said, "The fact that I am here shows there is a change in the outlook in government circles." She added that a change in mindsets needs to be brought about gradually.

Another panelist, Shohini Ghosh, associate professor at Jamia Millia Islamia, also spoke about the government's homophobia.

"Often the stand taken is that we are not ready for such legitimisation of same-sex relations. But it's futile to wait for a consensus. Progressive legislations, like the anti-sati law, always evoke opposition," she said.

Former UN under-secretary-general Nitin Desai said India belongs to a shrinking minority which still sees gays as criminals. "Hong Kong overturned its anti-sodomy law in 1980 and very few developing countries in South America dub same-sex relations as illegal," he said.

A public interest litigation (PIL) on the issue is pending before the Delhi High Court in which the petitioner, Naz Foundation, has challenged the constitutional validity of Section 377.

Gautam Bhan of the gay advocacy group Voices Against 377, who read out Seth's letter, said diluting the law would not come in the way of penalising paedophilia and sexual abuse of children.

Other campaigners supporting Seth's letter include Swami Agnivesh, former attorney-general Soli Sorabjee, Mira Nair, Nandita Das, Soha Ali Khan, Shobha De, sociologists Ashis Nandy and Aditi Desai, authors Arundhati Roy Jhumpa Lahiri.