NEW DELHI: From its claim that private consensual sex between adults of same gender will encourage AIDS, to the clerical mistake in its affidavit, which described widow remarriage as an "offence'', the central government is attracting a lot of flak for its stand on homosexuality before the Delhi High Court.On Friday, HC was surprised to know that a typographical error had led to mention of widow remarriage as a crime in the central government's affidavit (the government admitted it was an error which would be removed). Pulling up the government counsel for the casual manner in which the Centre fashioned its response to a PIL on gay rights, the court also criticized the government for talking in two voices. While the health ministry has batted in favour of gay rights by pointing out it helps in its fight against AIDS, the home ministry has warned any relaxation in the section will lead to moral degradation of society.Curiously, the government has sought to reconcile the difference in approach by arguing before HC that "homosexuality results in spread of AIDS'' and justifying its opposition to the PIL. Relying on National Aids Control Authority (NACO) figures which the authority cited to press for decriminalisation of private consensual sex between adult gays, additional solicitor general P P Malhotra argued otherwise. Malhotra claimed since AIDS was rampant amongst gays, it showed homosexuality was the cause for this disease and if legalised, AIDS cases would shoot up. The government's stand has not only been viewed with skepticism by the court itself, but also been greeted with criticism by the legal community."The government stand is not always understandable. Personal biases creep into such issues and less research is done. The basis on which they are giving such an analogy is very questionable,'' wondered advocate Manoj Taneja, saying the government can't be stuck with antiquated laws."Gays are only saying that private consensual sex can't be treated as a crime. A gay person is born with a certain proclivity. You can't punish a inborn trait, just like one can't punish a disability. Is attaching criminality to a personality trait justified? The government stand is completely off the mark. The section is a dead letter,'' maintains noted criminal lawyer K T S Tulsi, trashing the arguments of the central government.