NEW DELHI: "Union Home Minister Shivraj Patil should be more progressive," Health Minister A Ramadoss said on Tuesday, while referring to his Cabinet colleague's stand against legalizing homosexuality."I will ask for Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's intervention once he returns to India," Ramadoss said. "World over, people are accepting homosexuality. The home minister should be a lot more sensitive. How can we control physiological feelings of people," he added.The ministries of health and home have been at loggerheads over the issue of de-criminalisation of homosexuality. While the health ministry wants section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which criminalizes homosexuality, dropped on the grounds that it is impending India's fight against the deadly HIV, the home ministry wants the penal provisions to be retained as its deletion would open the floodgates of delinquent behaviour.According to Ramadoss, the number of men who have sex with men (MSMs) are increasing tremendously in India. The situation is worst in states like Maharashtra, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, Goa, West Bengal and Gujarat.Ramadoss said ignoring this community will weaken India's fight against HIV. "At present, any doctor treating a gay for HIV can be jailed. In one instance, a social worker languished in jail for nine months for trying to treat a gay HIV infected person," he said."I fully support protecting children against sexual abuse and treating paedophiles as criminals. But homosexuality must be legalised specially from the point of health issues," he added.According to American Foundation for AIDS Research or AMFAR, MSMs are 19 times more likely to be infected with HIV than the general population. AMFAR trawled through 128 country reports submitted to UNAIDS to find that 44% of countries, including India, failed to provide any data on gay men.Ramadoss said, "At present, we don't know exactly how many gays live in India because everybody is afraid to come out in the open. We know the HIV infection status of only 50% of these men. Around 86% of HIV infection is through unprotected sex."The National Aids Control Organisation estimates that India is home to 2.5 million MSMs of which 100,000 are at high risk of contracting HIV due to multi-partner and commercial sexual practices. Already, 15% of this community have got infected with the deadly disease.Ramadoss's comments came a day after the government asked the Delhi High Court to ignore the views of its health ministry on removing a penal provision against homosexuality.Appearing before a division Bench, additional solicitor general P P Malhotra said, "It does not matter what theminister, A Ramadoss, and the ministry's affidavit says. It is for the court to decide on the issue."