With tech czar Tim Cook coming out of the closet and flaunting his sexuality with pride, Hyderbad LGBT community echoes his sentiment and says it’s awesome to be gay!

She dons many a hat. A professor of comparative religious studies at San Jose State University, California, Victoria Rue, 67, is a priest, a lesbian and a theatreperson.

Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community and their supporters gathered for the city's fourth annual LGBT pride parade on Sunday.

He is the fresh, young face of LGBT community today, who started his career as an actor, VJ, choreographer and even won Mr Gay India 2014 pageant and went on to represent India at Mr Gay World 2014 contest

The United States on Thursday sought an end to discrmination to the LGBT community in India.

Facebook and representatives of the LGBT communities have found a solution acceptable, allowing people to use assumed names, subject to verification.

Despite steady rise in the number of charactersfrom LGBT community in our films, there’shardly a change in how they are portrayed

The first week of December will witness the Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender (LGBT) community in the city coming together for a two-day 'Gujarat LGBT Pride Festival' for raising awareness and celebrating the rights of the LGBT community. The festival will be hosted by Gujarat LGBT Pride Festival Foundation in association with Rangrez and Foram Foundation.

The LGBT supporters protest, which continued from 10 am to 5 pm, was led by Samapathik Trust. The protestors wore black bands and also observed a token fast as a mark of protest.

Over 250 Pune citizens signed a petition registering the protest and pleading for a remedy against the gainst the order of the Supreme Court that criminalizes gay-sex on December 1.

"We will have a meeting soon with senior police officers in attendance to work out the modalities for the new system. The FIR centre will forward all complaints it receives to various police station that has jurisdiction over the crimes," he said. The city police will also try to bring in system for more community involved policing with the close coordination with an NGO Janagraha to bring in a people-friendly policing in the city, Reddi added.

The Mumbai Police in association with HR College launched their initiative 'community policing' to assist help desks for children, women and senior citizens at police stations across the city on Saturday. Your 2 hours a day, thrice a week for 100 days can change many lives. Apply now to volunteer with Teach India at www.teachindia.net for Delhi/NCR & Mumbai region only.

The coast guard would hold a community interaction programme with the local fishermen at 10am on August 22 at Thengaithittu fishing harbour. The representatives from the coast guard and fisheries and marine police department would demonstrate the use of life saving equipment and exhibit their skills on fire-fighting and pre-monsoon preparedness besides highlighting the first aid precautionary measures to be adopted during emergencies.

Deekshabhoomi-based Dr Ambedkar College has added another feather to its cap with the UGC awarding it 'Community College Scheme' on a pilot basis. The college has introduced one-year 'Diploma in Health Care Assistance (Geriatric Care)' where it will admit 50 students. "Already 32 admissions are made and we are expecting good response. The course is divided into six months of theory and practical training each at leading hospitals," principal Malti Reddy and vice principal Arvind Joshi informed.

Community police should join hands with the Government to improve the law and order situation in society, said Dr Shalini Rajneesh, Director, Sakala Mission, Principle Secretary, DPAR, Kannada, Culture, Information and Public Relations. She was speaking at the special training programme organized for community police at the Sakala Training Centre in Bangalore on Thursday.

The Mangalore Hadinalku Mogaveera Samyukta Sabha will suspend all fishing activities on June 6 seeking the immediate arrest of Sathish Baikampady, main accused in murder of Gangadhar Pangal, community leader and trustee of Urwa Mariyamma Temple.

Nitte University will soon take up the project of setting up a community radio service to dovetail with its health and educational services.

Dr Abdeali Qutbuddin and Dr Aziz Qutbuddin sons of Syedna Khuzaima Qutbuddin, will unveil the Syedna's plans for the future as also the steps intended to ensure that the Dawoodi Bohra community and society at large understand the correct position. This will be done at a press conference on Tuesday.

A community college set up by Sevalaya charitable trust was inaugurated at Kasuva Village near Thiruninvravur on Monday. The Mahakavi Bharatiar Community College will provide training on programmes such as carpentry, refrigerator mechanic and beautician courses for students from the village.