Leader Vows French Role in Airstrikes on ISIS in Iraq - NYTimes.comPARIS — President François Hollande said Thursday that France was willing to join the United States-led campaign against the Islamic State, including airstrikes against militants in Iraq, saying the world was confronting unremitting brutality.

Observing that the militants had conquered territory in Iraq and Syria, Mr. Hollande said the group had been able to grow partly because of international inertia. But he emphasized that France’s intervention would be limited to providing air support, including strikes.

The Islamic State, also known by the acronyms ISIS or ISIL, “massacres anyone who resists it; hunts minorities, notably Christians; commits atrocities against civilians; decapitates journalists; crucifies opponents; kidnaps women,” he said. “That is the movement we are up against.”

Mr. Hollande traveled to Baghdad last week to help mobilize support for military strikes against Islamic militants. On Thursday, he said he had met with his top military advisers and had agreed to Iraq’s request for air support to reinforce Iraqi soldiers and Kurdish fighters. He said French fighter jets would strike once targets had been identified. “That means in a short time frame,” he said.

While the United States has sought to mobilize allies in the Middle East and Europe as a prelude to possible airstrikes against the militant group in Syria, Mr. Hollande stressed that French airstrikes would be limited to Iraq. Stressing that boots on the ground were not an option, he repeated the warnings of his foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, who has cautioned against the perils of extending intervention into Syria and seeming to support the Syrian government of President Bashar al-Assad.

Mr. Hollande also said that France planned to set up a military hospital in the forest area of Guinea to help in the fight against the Ebola epidemic that has ravaged West Africa.

Mr. Hollande made his remarks during his fourth news conference since becoming president in 2012, and he used the occasion to try to reassert his authority amid a flat economy and an approval rating of 13 percent.

He spoke just days after his beleaguered Socialist government survived a parliamentary vote of confidence on Tuesday aimed at securing support for his economic policies at a time of growing divisions in Europe and in his own party over how to address a struggling European economy, including France’s 10 percent unemployment.

Alluding to the simmering battle in Europe between Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, who advocates austerity measures to revive Europe’s economic fortunes, and leaders of other countries like France who say such policies are stifling growth, he said France was committed to the necessary changes. But he said it needed more time.

On Thursday, Mr. Hollande’s administration dismissed reports in the French news media that the financial ratings agency Moody’s was poised to downgrade France’s credit rating on Friday after the government declared last week that it would not be able to meet targets for reducing the deficit for at least another two years. Mr. Hollande said he did not know what Moody’s would do.

He indicated that he was determined to follow through on his plans for spending cuts totaling 50 billion euros (about $65 billion) through 2017, and for a package of tax incentives for companies in an effort to spur hiring. “We can’t build anything without competitive industries,” he said.

In addition to the turmoil in his government, Mr. Hollande’s presidency was shaken by embarrassing revelations in a best-selling tell-all book published this month by his former companion Valérie Trierweiler, who characterized him as a controlling man who secretly despised the poor.

When he became president, Mr. Hollande sought to distinguish himself from his charismatic and mercurial predecessor, Nicolas Sarkozy, whose private life and what was called his “bling bling” lifestyle alienated many French. But last January, Mr. Hollande generated global headlines when a French tabloid exposed his affair with a French actress, Julie Gayet.

Asked about the book on Thursday, Mr. Hollande said he had already addressed the issue. “I invoked the respect due to the office of the president, and I won’t give any other answer,” he said.