Muslim Women Must Take the Lead in Fighting Extremists ...Sara Khan is the director of Inspire, which addresses inequality of Muslim women in Britain.

In the global debate on terrorism and the Islamic State – one voice has gone largely unheard, that of Muslim women. Yet we bear the brunt of extremists operating in our communities with the anguish and hatred they leave in their wake.

As radicals recruit vulnerable young people in the United States, Canada and Europe, families are left broken and grieving when teenagers vanish only to be found participating in mass killings.

Too often the voices of Muslim women are ignored, our concerns swept under the carpet. We are the eyes and ears in our communities and homes, acutely attuned to the first signs of extremist activity and behavior. But too often, statutory agencies and government have stared right past us.

This is no longer permissible. In September, the women’s network I run in the United Kingdom – Inspire – began a national campaign to empower Muslim women to make a stand. We were determined to make a clear statement in public that Muslim women are not invisible, that we have a voice and we’re prepared to take the lead in crushing the twisted theology of murder and bloodshed.

Last month, more than 100 British Muslim women gathered in London under a banner with the hashtag #makingastand. Our emblem has been a Muslim woman in a Union Jack hijab making the point that we are proud to hold the combined identity of being Muslim and British.

I was pleased to receive a supportive tweet from a young American Muslim on the day of our launch with an accompanying selfie in a Stars and Stripes hijab. She is one of the millions of Muslim women across the world for whom our message is long overdue: We are proud to be loyal to our country while at the same time peacefully observing our faith. And we are as sickened as any other right-thinking person at the sight of filmed beheadings, slave markets and stoning of women. It represents a hideous distortion of our religion.

Americans should jettison old mindsets about Islam. The real division on the global stage is between decent human beings and terrorists, irrespective of their faith. Muslim women are natural leaders in the fight against global extremism. It’s our rights, after all, that are trodden underfoot by the so-called Islamic State and their supporters in the West. So the more Muslim women advance, the more the extremists are pushed back.

It is true that a small but significant number of Muslim women from the West have chosen to become perpetrators of violence alongside ISIS. But who have been their victims? More often than not, it’s other Muslim women in Syria or Iraq that have been beaten over their dress, passed around as “jihadi brides” or stoned to death for alleged adultery.

Glance back at Islam’s earliest history and you’ll find powerful Muslim women who were preachers and political leaders – as well as being confidantes of the Prophet. Today, the terrorists have reduced us to covered-up, secluded slaves. Objects without voices. Please do not see us in the same light.