Lawmakers Want Congress to Decide on Military Action Against ISIS ...WASHINGTON — A bipartisan group of lawmakers on Wednesday called for Congress to debate and vote on whether to authorize President Obama to take military action against Sunni militants in Iraq and Syria.

In a letter to Speaker John A. Boehner, the lawmakers — Representatives Barbara Lee of California and James McGovern of Massachusetts, both Democrats, and Walter B. Jones, Republican of North Carolina — said it was time for Congress to weigh in on whether to give Mr. Obama the power to broaden what began as a limited military mission in Iraq.

The number of American troops and airstrikes in Iraq has “increased significantly” while lawmakers have been on their August break, the three House members said, and the administration has begun weighing whether to expand the operation to Syria.

“We all share concerns about the Islamic State’s (IS) brutal tactics and further destabilization of the region,” the lawmakers wrote, adding that they also supported the Iraq mission that Mr. Obama announced on Aug. 7. “But current military operations now underway in Iraq appear to be beyond the scope of these limited purposes, and even greater expansion is under discussion.

“These are serious matters that require congressional debate and a vote on whether to authorize them,” the letter says.

The administration has already authorized surveillance flights over Syria and is discussing the use of airstrikes targeting the militant group that calls itself Islamic State and is more commonly known as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS. The letter urges Mr. Boehner to determine “what scope of authorization might be required” and to instruct the House Foreign Affairs Committee to draft a measure that would approve military action.

The administration has contended that Mr. Obama has the constitutional authority to wage the air campaign in Iraq and has complied with the 1973 War Powers Act, which requires the president to notify lawmakers when American armed forces are called into action.

“It is clear that the current mission in Iraq has extended beyond the limited, specific and targeted scope of preventing genocide and ensuring the security of U.S. personnel,” Ms. Lee said.

“Congress must have the opportunity to debate all options and consequences, including military, economic and diplomatic ones, to prevent the Islamic State from further destabilizing the region,” she said.

If congressional authorization is necessary, she added, “It must be limited and specific to prevent passing of another blank check for endless war.”

Members of both parties have long been reluctant to cast votes on matters of war, and most showed little appetite this month to do so on the airstrikes in Iraq, with midterm elections just months away and Mr. Obama promising the mission would be limited.

But some lawmakers have grown increasingly uncomfortable with that hands-off approach, especially after ISIS beheaded the American journalist James Foley and released a video showing the execution. The White House announced last week that United States forces had tried and failed to rescue Mr. Foley and other hostages this summer.

“It would be wise for Congress to come together and draft a grant of some authority for the president to confront that challenge,” said Congressman Adam Smith of Washington, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee. At the same time, he said he could not imagine “in a million years” that would happen.

“There is simply no way on earth that members of Congress are going to come together and agree on what the language for an authorization for the use of force in Syria is — it’s just not going to happen,” Mr. Smith said.

The authors of the letter collaborated on a resolution — passed overwhelmingly last month by the House — that bars the president from deploying American troops in a “sustained combat role” in Iraq without specific authorization from Congress.

“It is imperative that Congress uphold its constitutional duty to authorize the use of our military,” Mr. Jones said in a statement. “The situation in Iraq is a grave one, and before sending our uniformed men and women into danger we owe it to them and the people we represent to fully debate the matter and have a vote.”