A REGION INFLAMED: IN EXILE; An Islamic Terrorism Suspect ...A REGION INFLAMED: IN EXILE; An Islamic Terrorism Suspect, Living in Norwegian Refuge, Plays Down His Past

But Mr. Krekar, a passportless refugee here, says that there is no link and that the United States is exaggerating -- though not necessarily inventing -- his comrades' role.

The shadowy group, which he said had about 600 members when he was there, drew international attention after the United States singled it out in the period just before the war in Iraq as the link between Al Qaeda and Saddam Hussein. American forces attacked Ansar forces in the war's opening salvos, and the Pentagon has blamed the group for violence in Iraq since. The Italian police now want to question Mr. Krekar about a suspected Ansar cell in Milan. Its members, arrested last month, are believed to have been recruiting fighters for Iraq.

Mullah Krekar, as the man is known, founded the radical Islamist group Ansar al-Islam in northeastern Iraq two years ago. A Kurd, he was arrested in Iran and deported to Europe in May 2002.

While bombs explode in Iraq, killing soldiers and civilians, one of the men the United States says is partly responsible is sitting in a garret apartment in the land of the Vikings, dreaming of an Islamic state in the country he left behind.

''Americans came to our area, destroyed our organization and our mosques and killed our brothers, and if now my brothers inside Iraq attack American soldiers, it's a very, very natural reaction,'' he said recently, ripping ruby kernels from a pomegranate in his small living room. He said he did not condone attacks on civilians inside Iraq or on Americans outside it.

Mr. Krekar, 47, said he had made no attempt to contact his fellow militants since returning to Norway earlier this year after having been held for months on terrorism charges in Iran and the Netherlands.

His good-natured aplomb has apparently charmed some Norwegians. Weeks after the police seized his wife's cookbook along with some of his papers, for example, he demanded it back, complaining that he was sick of eating apple cake and that his wife could not make anything else without her recipes. (A newspaper printed some Norwegian recipes for his wife to tide him over.)

So many admirers have asked him for a photograph that he put one on his business card.

But with potential enemies here and abroad, he said, he rarely leaves his home in Oslo's immigrant-heavy Gronland neighborhood except to attend Friday Prayers at a nearby mosque.

Mr. Krekar, born Najm al-Din Faraj Ahmad and raised in northern Iraq, says he devoted his life to building an Islamic state there after Mr. Hussein used chemical weapons on the Kurds in 1988. It is absurd, he said, to think he could have been a Hussein ally.

He said that Ansar's goal was to form an Islamic state in the north and that his own goal was the one of all good holy warriors: the restoration of the caliphate, or Muslim theocracy, that disappeared with the collapse of the Ottoman Empire after World War I.

He arrived in Norway in 1991, a refugee in a United Nations program to relocate Kurds fleeing Mr. Hussein's wrath after the Persian Gulf war, and his family followed.

He said his only link to Al Qaeda was what he called two separate and inconsequential meetings with Osama bin Laden and Dr. Ayman al-Zawahiri, a senior lieutenant, in Pakistan in the late 1980's, before the terrorist network was born. He denies that Ansar ever produced chemical or biological weapons, as the United States has charged.

In the 1990's, he said, he spent periods in the Kurdish mountain region between Iran, Iraq and Turkey, helping set up a military training camp for a Kurdish Islamic movement. When factional disputes broke out, he sided with younger, more militant members, forming Ansar in December 2001. The group's name means Supporters of Islam.

The United States had begun its offensive in Afghanistan, sending many Qaeda fighters fleeing into Iran. But Mr. Krekar said he knew nothing of Qaeda training materials found in Ansar camps. He said there were no foreign Ansar fighters during his brief tenure as leader.

He said Ansar's rank and file were uneducated Kurdish mountain boys who did not even speak Arabic and would not easily be able to operate in the areas of Iraq where most of the violence is taking place today.

His group had just 11 Arab members, all Iraqis, when he was in charge, he said; some are no doubt fighting Americans in Sunni Muslim areas, he said. He also said he believed that ''holy warriors'' from Saudi Arabia and other Muslim countries joined Ansar in the weeks before the war, and that they, too, might be fighting the Americans.

He concedes that Ansar may have changed direction since he left the area. But he doubts that there are even a hundred active Ansar fighters in Iraq today.

Iran arrested him on its side of the border five months after Ansar was formed and eventually sent him to the Netherlands, where he was jailed and then returned to Norway.

His arrival in Oslo in January alarmed many Norwegians, and he was briefly detained in March, the day before the bombing of Baghdad heralded the American-led invasion.

But he has been cleared of any crimes in Norway, where, to the chagrin of American officials, he is free to stay.

He says he spends his mornings following news on Arab satellite television or the Internet, then receives reporters or his lawyer and pens his memoirs. The family lives, he says, off the meager earnings of his wife, who works in a kindergarten.

The mullah, barefoot, in a gray suit over a blue-black shirt buttoned to the neck, excuses himself to pray facing a small framed photograph of the Kaaba in Mecca. His 9-year-old son, watching Japanese cartoons in German on television, scoots his chair aside to give his father room.

If Mr. Krekar can get travel documents, he wants to go to the United States and Britain to clear his name and then return to Iraq, he said.

''It doesn't mean I will go back to be a leader of Ansar al-Islam,'' he said. ''Everything has changed, and we must think about the new Iraq.''

In the meantime, his children are growing up Norwegian. A daughter in a black head scarf returns from school and disappears into the kitchen. Soon, the smell of incense is overpowered by the smell of toast.

Photo: Mullah Krekar, founder of Ansar al-Islam, now lives in Norway. (Photo by Scanpix, via Associated Press)