Umm el Fahm Journal; Winds of Islam Sweep Israel, Changing ...But the fundamentalist surge has also spawned militancy. A resident of Umm el Fahm and three men from the neighboring village of Musheirifa were sentenced to life imprisonment for hacking and stabbing to death three Jewish soldiers in an army camp on Feb. 14. The convicted men were described by Israeli officials as followers of the Islamic Movement, although the organization has condemned the attack.

Islam's growing appeal was demonstrated in Israel's election campaign in June, when Arab parties competed for endorsement by the Islamic Movement.

The towering mosque complex, which includes a medical clinic and a library, is a project of the Islamic Movement, an organization that is leading a religious revival among Israeli Arabs and changing the face of Muslim towns and villages.

The golden dome of an imposing new mosque soars above the narrow streets and crowded buildings of this Arab town, boldly proclaiming its return to Islam.

The attack severely strained theconflicted relationship between Israel's 760,000 Arab citizens and the state that claims their allegiance.

Israeli Arabs, a minority among more than four million Jews, live in a quandary of dual loyalty that has been sharpened by the uprising of the 1.7 million Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. 'Profound Despair' Cited

Government officials have been suspicious of the Arab minority's sympathy with the Palestinian cause, while Israeli Arabs resent what they consider systematic discrimination in state budgets and services that has left them with high unemployment and crime, as well as rising alcoholism and drug abuse.

This sense of second-class citizenship, some specialists say, has driven many Arabs to seek alternatives in Palestinian nationalism or Islamic fundamentalism.

"There is profound despair in part of the Israeli Arab community because of a feeling that the State of Israel has not done enough for its Arab citizens and there is no chance it will do enough for them," said Dr. Alexander Bligh, the Prime Minister's Adviser on Arab Affairs.

Several years ago, Islamic associations in Arab towns began organizing projects ranging from charity collections for the needy to volunteer "work camps" in which residents paved roads and sidewalks, refurbished buildings and built homes for the poor. They urged followers to attend religious services, campaigned against Western music and alcohol and lobbied for separation of the sexes in schools.

The loose coalition of local associations gradually evolved into a national political movement, and its investment in community work paid dividends in the last countrywide municipal vote, in 1989. Islamic Movement candidates won in five Israeli Arab towns and villages.

Umm el Fahm, which has 28,000 people and lies about 20 miles southeast of Haifa near the West Bank, has a Mayor from the Islamic Movement, whose imprint is everywhere.

In tidy streets, stenciled wall slogans proclaim "Cleanliness is part of the Faith" and "There is no God but Allah." A drug rehabilitation center operates near the central mosque, and a city ordinance bans the sale of alcohol. Many women cover their hair and men stream to mosques several times a day.

A similar transformation has occurred at Kafr Bara, northeast of Tel Aviv, where the Islamic Movement has mobilized villagers to build a community center, expand the local school and set up playgrounds.

"The state hasn't done half of what our movement has accomplished," said the 34-year-old local council head, Kamel Rayan.

This alternative to the state is precisely what worries Israeli officials, who point to its ideological links with Muslim groups in the occupied territories and abroad that advocate holy war to eradicate Israel and to set up an Islamic state in its place.

The movement's leaders reply that while they share the religious ideal of Islamic rule and consider their country Muslim soil, they reject violence and are willing to accept Israel for the sake of peaceful coexistence.

The architect of the movement's strategy is Sheik Abdullah Nimr Darwish, a 44-year-old native of Kafr Qasim, northeast of Tel Aviv. He was imprisoned for 11 years ago for belonging to a militant Islamic group that vandalized and burned Jewish-owned property. Today he preaches a nonviolent message.

An Islamic state, he said, can be proclaimed only in a land where Muslims are the majority, so it is not appropriate in Israel. Holy war, or jihad, by Israel's Muslims is out of the question, Sheik Darwish said, because such a campaign may be waged only by an Islamic state.

"I unequivocally reject military jihad," he said, "but jihad can also be waged through politics, education and the media."

Such conciliatory statements have drawn criticism from Islamic militants in the occupied territories and skepticism from Israeli officials.

Dr. Bligh said the movement shared the goals of other fundamentalist movements and had merely changed tactics, using one tone for foreign comsumption and another for its followers. He cited newspapers that have included references to Israelis as "disciples of Satan" and "cannibalistic beasts in human form," putting into effect Nazi-like policies against Arabs.

"Our problem is determining where freedom of expression ends and incitement begins," Dr. Bligh said.

Photo: A sense of second-class citizenship among Israel's 760,000 Arabs has led to a religious revival that has brought the Islamic Movement into the nation's fractious politics. In Umm el Fahm, the golden dome of a new mosque is an imposing backdrop to the simple task of one of the townspeople. (Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times) Map of Israel showing location of Umm El Fahm.