The ISIS Threat: Teaching About the Complex War Raging in Iraq ...ISIS, a shorthand name for the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, has made news in the past few months for its dramatic military conquest of Iraqi territory, its ruthless treatment of Iraqi minorities such as the Yazidis, and a string of videotaped beheadings of Western hostages, including two United States journalists covering the civil war in Syria.

The situation in Iraq and Syria is complex, to say the least. It presents a continuing humanitarian crisis, with millions of people fleeing for their lives, and hundreds of thousands being killed. It presents a threat to Middle East stability, with ISIS promising to create an Islamic caliphate, or state, erasing modern borders and imposing its own version of fundamentalist law. Furthermore, ISIS presents an unknown threat to the larger world, including the United States, with the militant group beheading international hostages and recruiting jihadists from across the globe.

In this lesson, students will analyze videos, maps, graphs and images related to ISIS, and then discuss how the United States and the world should respond to ISIS’ rise in Iraq and Syria. We also offer additional background information and links to Times resources for further research.

1. Start With What Students Already Know: Begin by asking students if they have heard about ISIS in the news. What have they read or seen? What questions do they have? You can write some key words that students might mention, such as Iraq, Syria or American airstrikes, on the board, along with any questions students raise.

2. Watch a Video: Show the video above to students, though it is so short (under two minutes) and so packed with information that you may want them to watch it twice. Encourage students to write down key facts as they watch. Then ask the class: What more did you learn?

3. Analyze Images and Text: Next, divide the class into pairs or small groups to analyze the maps, graphs, charts and images in this Times interactive, “How ISIS Works.”

Add these panels as well: “What the Militants Want: A Caliphate Across Syria and Iraq,” “Iraqis Driven From Their Homes by ISIS” and “Ten Years of ISIS Attacks in Iraq.”

Each student group can analyze, take notes and then report back to the class on one of the panels of information: Organization, Territory, Financing, Governing, Military, Weapons, Geographic Goals, Refugees and Attacks. The class can then write a description of what ISIS is, how it works and how it has affected Iraq and Syria.

If you want additional images and text for students to analyze, you can use the interactive “The Iraq-ISIS Conflict in Maps, Photos and Video” or Patrick Chappatte’s editorial cartoons.

4. Discuss Foreign Policy: Ask students: Should the United States and other countries use military action to try to eliminate ISIS? Why? Students should support their answers using information they learned during the lesson. As an exit ticket or homework assignment, they can write an evidence-based response to the same question.

5. Go Further: Below, we offer additional background information, discussion questions and related Times resources on ISIS, as well as on the larger conflicts in Iraq and Syria. You might assign different topics to students for further research, or explore one subject in greater depth. Students can also continue to follow news about ISIS by using Times Topics.

Eleven years ago the United States declared war on Saddam Hussein’s government in Iraq. The president then, George W. Bush, acted based on American intelligence, stating that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction. While the United States never found the purported W.M.D. (PDF), it did help to create a new democratically-elected government in Iraq after the Iraqi regime fell.

The new government was weak, however, and many Iraqis claimed that it favored the majority Shiites at the expense of Sunnis and Kurds. Meanwhile, the new president, Barack Obama, promised to pull out the remaining United States forces from Iraq to fulfill a campaign promise and encourage Iraqis to maintain their own security.

Now in 2014, Iraq is in chaos. Sunni insurgents, an uneasy alliance between former Saddam Hussein loyalists and Islamic fundamentalists, have overrun large swaths of Iraq, including the country’s second-largest city, Mosul.

By early summer they had positioned themselves within a two-hour drive of Baghdad, and they threatened the Iraqi Kurdish regional capital, Erbil. ISIS has waged a war of intimidation and ethnic cleansing as it has conquered territory, killing and forcing religious minorities such as the Yazidis to flee to the mountains.

Questions to Consider: Why is the United States going back into Iraq? Will American airstrikes against ISIS lead to another Iraq war? Will the new Iraqi government help to alleviate sectarian tensions? Will Iraq break apart further, with Iraqi Kurds creating their own independent state?

In neighboring Syria, a civil war has been devastating that nation since the spring of 2011. The civil war started as an uprising to overthrow the president, Bashar al-Assad, but has devolved into a calamitous three-way conflict between Syrian government forces, moderate rebels and ISIS extremists.

A year ago President Obama seriously considered launching airstrikes against the Assad regime as punishment for waging chemical warfare against civilians, but the Assad government agreed to destroy its chemical weapon stockpile, and the Obama administration backed down.

The United States has been quietly supporting moderate Syrian rebels, known as the Free Syrian Army, but has largely stayed on the sideline. The emergence of ISIS this summer as a major threat to not just Syria, but also Iraq, has changed the stakes, however, and now the United States is making plans to launch airstrikes within Syria and arm and train moderate Syrian opposition fighters.

Questions to Consider: Should the United States be fighting in the Syrian civil war? Will American strikes on ISIS end up helping the Syrian regime? Should the United States be arming and training moderate Syrian opposition fighters? Do moderate rebels still have a chance to defeat President Assad and ISIS?

Since this summer, when ISIS grabbed the world’s attention by seizing Mosul, Iraq’s second-largest city, and sending residents fleeing, the United States and many other countries have determined that ISIS is a serious threat.

The United States acted by bombing militant positions to prevent ISIS from overrunning Kurdish territory. And President Obama authorized humanitarian assistance, including airdrops of food and aid supplies, as well as targeted airstrikes to support the Yazidi minority and other civilians who fled into the mountains to escape ISIS.

But limited American airstrikes in Iraq are widely seen as insufficient to substantially weaken ISIS’ position, and Mr. Obama was harshly criticized after publicly stating in late August that “we don’t have a strategy yet.”

Last week President Obama announced a multipronged American strategy, which includes not just getting involved in Iraq, but also taking the fight into Syria, where ISIS is based. The United States has been actively seeking partners in this mission, and several European and Arab nations have pledged their support, although the details of what needs to be done and who will take responsibility are still being worked out.

Questions to Consider: Should the world view ISIS as a serious threat to stability in the Middle East? Should the United States work hard to make the fight against ISIS an international mission? Should the U.S. fight to hold Iraq together, or should it let Iraq break apart into separate sectarian states? How will the American public react to another United States war in the Middle East?

ISIS is thought to have around 20,000 or 30,000 fighters in Iraq and Syria, and perhaps half or more of them are foreign recruits. It is led by a man known as Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who was once detained by American forces in Iraq.

Questions to Consider: Will the world be able to work together to stop the steady flow of jihadists to ISIS? Will foreign fighters returning to their home countries from the Syrian and Iraqi civil wars present an additional threat to global security?

The beheadings of two American journalists and a British aid worker shocked the public and made clear ISIS’ brutal tactics. The videotaped executions put pressure on the Obama administration to announce a clear strategy for dealing with ISIS.

Questions to Consider: Should the United States and other nations pay ransom to free hostages held by terrorists?

ISIS is not only a well-oiled military machine, but has also demonstrated a deft command of many types of media, both to intimidate opponents and to rally supporters for its side.

Questions to Consider: Are some images, such as beheadings, too graphic to be shown on news outlets or shared via social media? Should companies such as Twitter or Facebook ever ban such images? Is allowing their dissemination actually helping ISIS spread its propaganda?

ISIS has reaped wealth by seizing property, selling oil, collecting ransoms and even robbing banks as it has advanced through Syria and Iraq. Some of its impressive firepower, for example, includes arms that the United States originally provided to the Iraqi military.

Questions to Consider: How can the international community interrupt ISIS’ substantial cash flow? How can the United States prevent military hardware it provides to Iraqi forces and moderate Syrian fighters from falling into the hands of ISIS?

Longtime rivals, the United States and Iran share a common interest in defeating ISIS, yet they still seem to be a long way from actively cooperating.

Questions to Consider: Is ISIS a major distraction from arguably the most serious threat in the Middle East, Iran’s march to build a nuclear bomb? Will the battle to defeat ISIS lead the United States and Iran to unprecedented cooperation? Will Iran be the major winner if ISIS is defeated?