Islamic Militants Extend Battle Into Another Iraqi Province - NYTimes ...BAGHDAD — A powerful jihadist group that has been fighting in Iraq’s Anbar region has taken over parts of a neighboring province, seizing three villages on Wednesday after a battle with government forces, according to security officials.

The forces of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki responded by preparing for a counter-offensive in the northern province, Salahuddin, even as they surrounded Anbar’s main city of Falluja, where the jihadist group, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, has seized control.

“The Islamic state of Iraq and the Levant are trying to distract our forces by having some of their members control this area here and there to move the battle from Anbar Province into other provinces like Salahuddin, Diyala and Mosul,” a security official said.

ISIS has become emboldened in the war in neighboring Syria, and in Iraq it has been fighting Mr. Maliki’s forces, mainly in Anbar Province.

While Al Qaeda’s central leadership has officially cut ties with the group, ISIS shares its ideology as it fights the Shiite-dominated government in Iraq and in Syria with the broader aim of building an Islamic state on its own terms.

Mr. Maliki, who has massed government forces outside of Falluja, said in his weekly speech on Wednesday: “The battle is about to end in Anbar.”

The fighting in the provinces is taking place as the capital continues to be the scene of daily bombings.

For the second consecutive day, the international zone, which is the seat of diplomatic and government offices, was attacked on Wednesday. Two dozen people were killed when suicide bombers and a vehicle packed with explosives detonated at or near entrances to the zone, according to the Interior Ministry.

In a separate attack on Wednesday, two car bombs exploded near a public market in southern Baghdad, killing 12 people and wounding 23.

Two rockets, identified as Katyushas, struck the international zone on Tuesday, killing a soldier.