A NATION CHALLENGED - CAIRO - Islamic Jihad, Forged in Egypt ...CAIRO, Oct. 3— It was the marksman's equivalent of threading a needle on the run.

Sgt. Hussein Abbas, believed to have sunk the first, fatal bullet into Anwar el-Sadat, told interrogators that he was able to shoot through the neck because the Egyptian president had stretched his head backward to view some fighter jets flying overhead.

With that assassination, 20 years ago this week, Egyptian Islamic Jihad announced its existence to the world. Pushed since then largely into exile, its leadership now forms the backbone for Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan, terrorism experts have said. It is believed to provide him with his two top lieutenants, another 200 loyal followers and its focus on training and specialized skills, notable elements in the Sept. 11 attacks.

Both Ayman al-Zawahiri, a surgeon, and Muhammad Atif, a military strategist, are leaders of Egyptian Islamic Jihad and said to be Mr. bin Laden's likeliest successors.

Experts believe that Islamic Jihad recruited only some 300 hard-core members in Egypt, carefully selecting alienated people with skills like forgery, military planning or marksmanship who would be useful in armed operations.

While Egyptian officials say they have no evidence linking Islamic Jihad to Mohamed Atta, the apparent mastermind of the terrorist assault on the New York and Washington, he fits the group's description with his training in urban planning and aviation and his Muslim militancy.

Experts say that while the September attacks are the work of Al Qaeda, they very much reflect the style that Islamic Jihad -- one of three terrorist groups singled out by President Bush in his address to Congress two weeks ago -- brought to Mr. bin Laden's group.

The targets were bold, the disregard for human life callous and the assault carried out by calculating men who presented a benign face to the world.

''They kill indiscriminately,'' said Hisham Kassem, the publisher of The Cairo Times, who became familiar with the Islamic movements through his work as a human rights activist. ''It doesn't matter if there are Muslims inside the World Trade Center, because they're in heaven before the towers hit the floor. The rest? No problem. They were infidels, anyway.''

Now that they operate almost exclusively outside Egypt, Islamic Jihad's members have been forced to shift its focus from a coup d'état in Cairo to targets abroad. And they have gradually trained their sights on the United States.

They are suspected of orchestrating the bombing of the United States Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 as part of Al Qaeda. That prompted a worldwide crackdown that apprehended a cell planning a similar attack in Albania. Egypt put 107 members on trial, including 62 in absentia and 13 members extradited from the Balkans.

Experts also say a note of desperation has entered their activities in recent years because the activists have failed to create an Islamic state, despite movements across the Arab world.

''It is partly directed at the movements themselves,'' said Yahya Sadowski, a political science professor at The American University of Beirut, speaking of the September attacks. ''It is a way of telling them 'We are still moving, still breathing, we still matter.' ''

Islamic Jihad's ideology vilifies Washington for bolstering the 20-year government of Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, which they view as corrupt, for supporting Israel against the Palestinians and for hounding the Islamic mujahedeen fighters from one country to the next.

While the group's official goal remains the creation of an Islamic state, Islamic Jihad members view their work as an almost apocalyptic struggle of Islam against the West.

''They decided that the liberation of Jerusalem starts from Washington,'' said Mohammed Salah, a journalist who has covered the group for a decade for the Arab daily Al Hayat.

Initially decimated in the wake of the Sadat assassination, Islamic Jihad was fortified in the early 1990's by veterans of the war in Afghanistan. One group went on trial for reorganizing the movement in 1992, and soon afterwards it hurled itself with renewed fury at the Egyptian government. An Afghan veteran turned suicide bomber attempted to assassinate the Egyptian interior minister in August 1993, and then a car bomb failed to kill the prime minister in November.

In 1995 the group crashed a truck bomb into the Egyptian Embassy in Pakistan, killing 15. The following year, a plot to set off a deadly explosion in Cairo's labyrinthine bazaars was thwarted.

The toll in Egypt mounted throughout the decade, with 1,200 police officers and Islamic militants killed, although the number of Islamic Jihad members killed is put around 25. Some 16,000 people with suspected links to Islamic movements remain jailed, according to human rights organizations.

By the end of the decade, Dr. al-Zawahiri, the surgeon who had become the group's leader, began forging an alliance with Mr. bin Laden. In February 1998, he signed the declaration announcing The Islamic Front for Fighting Crusaders and Jews. Its goals included attacking American military and civilian targets.

The move caused a split within Egyptian Islamic Jihad, experts say, with a splinter faction criticizing Dr. Zawahiri for shifting the focus away from Egypt. But 200 hard-core Islamic Jihad members went with him and now form the core of Mr. bin Laden's leadership circle.

Whether the movement has any future within Egypt is a matter of debate. Some experts note that such movements can always rise again unless the root problems that inspire them are resolved.

''As a group, Jihad activities have receded in Egypt,'' said Col. Fouad Allam, a former deputy director of the state security department for terrorism. ''But the ideology remains and was not confronted properly. It's like a tree, when you cut only the branches but leave the roots. With a little water and fertilizer, the branches will grow again.''

Photo: The assassination in 1981 of Anwar el-Sadat, center, with Vice President Hosni Mubarak, left, who succeeded him as Egypt's president, and Defense Minister Abu Ghazala, was Islamic Jihad's announcement to the world. (Associated Press)