Car-Bomb Killing in Turkey Revives Battle Over Islamic Politics ...The killing has stepped up the debate over the role of religion in public life. It has reached a level not seen since 1997, when fiercely secular military commanders orchestrated a campaign that forced Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan to resign. They charged that Mr. Erbakan, the guiding figure in Turkey's Islamic political movement, was trying to impose religious rule, which he has vigorously denied.

But some Turks doubt that Muslim fanatics were responsible for the attack. They suspect that it was engineered by a group close to the state that wants to raise the specter of an imminent religious threat. No arrests have been made.

The victim, Ahmet Taner Kislali, a newspaper columnist and former culture minister, was killed by a car bomb in Ankara last month. An obscure group of Islamic fighters claimed responsibility, according to the police.

The assassination of a leading secularist intellectual has revived the battle over Islamic politics that has polarized Turkey over the last few years.

Although more than 95 percent of Turks are Muslim, the country is a secular republic, and religious influence is severely restricted.

Turkey's senior prosecutor, Vural Savas, has asked a court to close Mr. Erbakan's religion-based party on the ground that it is plotting to transform Turkey into an Islamic state. The party, called Virtue, received 15.5 percent of the vote in the national election last April.

Mr. Savas has also filed charges against Mr. Erbakan, asserting that when he was prime minister in 1996 and 1997 he sought to destroy the secular system in Turkey. One charge, which alleges treason, could carry the death penalty. ''It is time to reclaim the republic,'' Mr. Savas said at a recent news conference.

Tempers are flaring here as Mr. Savas issues dire warnings and his critics ridicule them as wildly exaggerated. A wide gap has opened between those who believe radical measures are needed to suppress an imminent threat to the secular order and those who believe that Islamic politicians and others should be allowed to express their views without fear of prosecution.

Behind this conflict is one of the most profound questions facing Turkey: is there a threat to secularism and national unity so great that it justifies continued restrictions on freedom of speech, or has the country developed to the point at which all ideas can be safely discussed and debated in public?

For years Mr. Erbakan's Islamic political movement was part of the political mainstream, and it joined with other parties in supporting restrictions on political freedom. Its members, for example, backed the expulsion of Kurdish nationalists from Parliament in 1994 on the ground that their opinions were subversive.

Now, however, Islamic politicians have themselves become the object of lawsuits, political bans and jail sentences. As a result, in a remarkable turnaround, they have come to embrace the cause of free expression.

''Human rights and democracy must be fully implemented in Turkey, not just discussed but fully implemented,'' Mr. Erbakan said at a news conference on Sunday.

''It is said that if full democracy is permitted in Turkey, certain ideas and opinions will gain strength, and in the end all women will be forced to wear veils and then democracy will be destroyed,'' he said. ''These horror stories have nothing to do with reality. They are simply fabrications.''