Syrian Rebels Deal Qaeda-Linked Group a Reversal - NYTimes.comBEIRUT, Lebanon — For months, the patchwork of rebel brigades spread across northern Syria watched with foreboding as a new group gradually expanded its control, filling a vacuum left by nearly three years of war.

The group, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, which is linked to Al Qaeda and known as ISIS, seemed less interested in fighting President Bashar al-Assad than in imposing its ultraconservative version of Islam, antigovernment activists said. It banned smoking, ousted other rebels from their bases, and detained and executed those it decided were opposed to its international jihadist project.

Last week, mounting tensions between the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria and other rebel groups exploded into clashes that have raged across northern Syria, left hundreds dead and further shattered the battle lines in a conflict that is increasingly destabilizing neighboring countries. Rebel fighters have driven the group from a number of areas in recent days, and on Wednesday they ejected it from its headquarters in the major city of Aleppo, dealing the group a sharp reversal.

The rebel infighting is by far the most widespread and deadly among Mr. Assad’s opponents since the start of the conflict nearly three years ago. It also highlights the divide between international efforts to convene a peace conference in Geneva on Jan. 22 and events on the ground.

The White House has worked to ensure the attendance at the conference of the opposition’s political leadership, the Syrian National Coalition. But that rebel group has stood by helplessly as violence has engulfed the territory where it had hoped to establish an alternative to Mr. Assad’s government. Its mostly exiled leaders have no sway over fighters in Syria.

While the rebels have recently been gaining on the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, their victory in Aleppo was quickly tempered by the discovery of dozens of prisoners found dead in the building’s courtyard, their hands tied and their eyes blindfolded, as if they had been executed by the group’s fighters as they withdrew, according to activists and videos of the site posted online.

Neither of the two sides in the rebel fighting presents a particularly attractive face to Western policy makers. The rebel brigades have become profoundly Islamist as the war has dragged on, and many mainline rebel leaders now consider the advancement of Sunni Islam and the foundation of an Islamic state goals of equal importance to the ousting of Mr. Assad.

Besides its affiliation with Al Qaeda and its espousal of a violent form of Islam, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria seeks to erase the border between Syria and Iraq and build an Islamic state that will serve as a base for international jihad. The group is the main destination for the foreign fighters who have flocked to Syria to join the war.

Further complicating the rebel landscape is the Nusra Front, one of Syria’s most powerful rebel groups, which has also declared allegiance to Al Qaeda but whose fighters have remained closer to Syria’s other rebel organizations. The Nusra Front has fought alongside other rebel groups against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria in recent days.

The difference between the two Qaeda affiliates has more to do with their approach than with their way of thinking, analysts say. “Their ideologies are very much the same, but Nusra is really embedding itself in the Islamic landscape, working with other groups and trying to compromise, while ISIS has been doing the opposite, which is why they have no more friends,” said Aron Lund, a researcher who edits a website on the Syria conflict for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

On Tuesday, in an audio recording released online, the Nusra Front’s leader called for a cease-fire and the creation of an Islamic court to mediate disputes. In a second recording released Tuesday and attributed to a spokesman for the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, the group threatened to “crush” its enemies.

Rebel anger had been building for months, but most hesitated to challenge the group.

“The rebels avoided confronting ISIS in the beginning because they didn’t want to be distracted from fighting the regime,” the activist Abdul-Rahman Ismael said by Skype from Aleppo. “They hoped that ISIS would help topple the regime but found otherwise, so it became necessary to fight ISIS before fighting the regime.”

The recent infighting here is attributed by many to the death of a rebel doctor, Hussein Suleiman, who was detained by the group and returned to his colleagues last week with bullet holes in his shoulder and the top of his head missing. Photos and videos of the dead doctor spread on social media, fueling the outrage.

Subsequent episodes further outraged the rebels: One of their leaders, detained by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, was found dead on the side of a road, and fighters from the group seized a former Syrian Army base that rebels had been using since last year. The fighting has produced grim scenes reminiscent of government killings of opposition activists earlier in the war.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said Wednesday that at least 385 people had been killed in five days of rebel infighting, including 56 civilians. The group, which tracks the conflict from Britain through a network of contacts in Syria, also said rebels had killed more than 40 fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria in Idlib Province.

Opposition activists who have compared the group’s heavy-handed tactics to those of Mr. Assad’s government were glad to see it pushed from Aleppo. One of them, who goes by the nom de guerre of Abu Fatih, said the group’s fighters accused him and his colleagues of being heretics, evicted them from their office and barred them from smoking in the street.

“Now my neighborhood has been liberated twice,” he said. “Once from the regime and the second time from ISIS.”