The World; Under the Lens: Southeast Asia Confronts Its Demons ...The World; Under the Lens: Southeast Asia Confronts Its Demons

A third bombing, in Manila on Friday, may well prove to have Al Qaeda fingerprints as well. But it is also possible that it will have purely local roots, born of a hodgepodge of local ethnic, political and economic tensions that have little to do with a global holy war.

But finding direct ties to Al Qaeda - or even to a single, discernible agenda - among the many groups and splinter groups has proved remarkably difficult, even when investigations are stirred by deadly bombings like those in Indonesia and the Philippines last week. The Bali bombing in particular, both American and Indoesian officials said, surely had a helping hand from Al Qaeda, although the dots - and there are many dots - are still being connected.

It made some sense. The region has the largest Muslim population in the world, and small Islamic militant groups with separatist aims - like Abu Sayyaf and Jemaah Islamiyah - were already in Southeast Asia long before Al Qaeda was routed from Afghanistan. Intelligence officials knew some groups had trained in Afghanistan or fought there alongside their Arab counterparts against the Soviet Union. Loose immigration rules in many parts of the region made movement easy, and the Asian financial crisis continued to sap vigor from local economies.

IT was quickly dubbed the second front in the war on terrorism. In the months following the Sept. 11 attacks, a series of arrests in Singapore and Malaysia and the Philippines seemed to imply that Al Qaeda had slipped down-continent and established itself from Bangkok to Manila and across the Indonesian archipelago.

At right, the overview of terrorism in the region and the many sources from which it springs.

(ORANGE) - ABU SAYYAF Seeks an Islamic state in the southern Phillippines.

(RED) - LASKAR JIHAD - Pursues holy war against Christians. Announced last week that it was disbanding.

Photos: THAILAND (green) (symbols indicat primary groups) The predominantly buddhist nation has enjoyed a reputation as a safe haven from the Muslim Militant movements that vax its neighbors to the south. Still, small but persistent separatist organizations operate in the largely Muslim provinces along Thailand's southern border with Malaysia though the extent to which these movements are in contact with other Sutheast Asian groups - or with Al Qaeda operatives in the Middle East - is unclear. After the bombings in Bali a week ago, Thai officials expressed fears that their own tourist resorts could be targeted, and the group Jemaah Islamiyah, long considered a terrorist organization by the West, includes southern Thailand in its proposed Islamic state.; ''I have ordered all agencies to put their security measures on full alert.'' Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra (Associated Press) MALAYSIA (green, purple, orange) Sometimes called a launching pad for terrorist activity, principally on evidence that two Sept. 11 hijackers, as well as Zacarias Moussaoui, were assisted by a Malaysian biochemist with links to Jemaah Islamiyah. The country has arrested dozens of members of Jemaah Islamiyah since last year, including several in Kuala Lumpur last week as part of the investigation of the bombings in Bali; Malaysia is also the base of the Kumpulan Mujahideen Malaysia (KMM), which favors the overthrow of the government and the creation of an Islamic state comprising Malaysia, Indonesia and the southern Philipines. A militant group from the Philippines, Abu Sayyaf, has also conducted operations here.; ''There is a lot of anger today in this world.'' Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad (Associate Press) SINGAPORE (green) The government of this rigidly controlled city state acted quickly after suspected Al Qaeda ''sleeper cells'' were uncovered last fall. Several members of Jemaah Islamiyah have been arrested, including 21 in September, for various plots to attack American targets. Videotapes found in Afghanistan indicate that terrorists with training in the Middle East were casing additional targets in Singapore.; ''Terrorism is not a faraway problem. It is here at our doorstep.'' Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong (Associated Press) PHILIPPINES (orange, green) Local police tied last week's explosion in the southern Philipines to the country's primary terrorist group, Abu Sayyaf, which the United States has linked to Al Qaeda. The group first gained notice in the southern Philippines in the early 1990's with demands for an Islamic state, eventually acquiring worldwide notoriety with a series of kidnappings and beheadings. Earlier this month, an American soldier was killed by a bomb - one week after an Abu Sayyaf leader called on Muslims in the Philippines to attack enemies of Islam. Some intelligence experts have suggested that Jemaah Islamiyah is present in the Philippines as well.; ''You must harden the targets. Do not be a soft target.'' President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo (Retuers) INDONESIA (green, red) Before the Bali bombing, Indonesia's reluctance to acknowledge terrorism in its midst frustrated the West. The group Laskar Jihad, which reportedly has ties to the Indonesian military, has waged a violent campaign against Christians in the province of Maluku. Indonesian-born Fathur Rohman al-Ghozi (top right) has been tied to several bomb plots int he Philippines as part of the group Jamaah Islamiyah. He is now in prison. And Indonesian officials investigating the Bali bombing ordered Jamaah Islamiyah's leader, Abu Bakar Bashir (bottom right), to appear for questioning. The Muslim cleric, who denies any involvement, complained of fatigue, fainted and was taken to a hospital on Friday - one day before his scheduled appearance before investigators.; ''Terrorism is a real danger and a potential threat to national security.'' President Megawati Sukarnoputri (Retuers) Oct. 17 Bombs kill six and injure hundres; Oct. 12 Bombs kill nearly 200. (Associated Press) Source: U.S. Department of State, ''Patterson of Global Terrorism,'' 2001; Brookings Institution; ''Is Southeast Asia the Second Front?'' by John Gershman (Foreign Affairs, July/August, 2002); Federation of American Scientists.