AFGHAN REBEL OPPOSES TALKS; VOWS BATTLE FOR ISLAMIC ...He used the term for an Islamic holy war that is also the common word for the fight against Afghan Government forces and their Soviet allies.

''But there are people in America who are against our jihad,'' Mr. Hekmatyar said in an interview in Peshawar, the Pakistani city near the Afghan border that is the center for the seven parties fighting the Moscow-backed Government of President Najibullah in Kabul.

Yet the leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, denies that he is anti-American, as is frequently charged.

The leader of a powerful Afghan guerrilla party and major recipient of covert American military assistance, whose aim is a ''pure'' Islamic state, consistently accuses the United States of conspiring with the Soviet Union against Afghanistan.

''They are in the Government, in the parties, in the public,'' Mr. Hekmatyar continued, speaking in English. ''There is a class of people who support our struggle because they are against the Russians, not as an Islamic struggle.'' Opposes Geneva Talks

Mr. Hekmatyar strongly opposes the Geneva talks on Afghanistan, with the United Nations acting as mediator between the Afghan Government and Pakistan. The talks, which resumed after an offer in February by Mikhail S. Gorbachev to begin withdrawing Soviet troops within two months after an accord is reached, have been blocked by differences on military aid and the shape of a postwar government.

''Gorbachev would not have made this announcement without an understanding with the United States,'' Mr. Hekmatyar said. ''The Washington reaction proved that there is a secret conspiracy. If the Geneva accords are signed, you will find us on the battlefield. I personally will be inside Afghanistan.''

The rebel leader, a 39-year-old former engineering student, who speaks in a soft but insistent voice with the certainty of a man expounding dogma, leads a wing of Hizbi Islami, or Islamic Party. In the frequent discord of the loose guerrilla coalition, Mr. Hekmatyar's wing of the split party stands out for being coherent and consistent. Currently Leading Rebels

On Tuesday, Mr. Hekmatyar was named chairman of the coalition. The post rotates every three months among the seven leaders.

Mr. Hekmatyar, who always wears traditional Afghan dress, preaches an Islamic revolution. Unlike his fellow alliance leaders, who strike above all an orthodox, anti-Soviet and anti-Communist tone, he advocates a radical program that rejects a return to the traditional ways of Islam that dominated Afghanistan during the monarchy that was overthrown in 1973 and survived through the political struggles that preceded the move of Soviet troops into Afghanistan in December 1979.

''We want a pure Islamic state in Afghanistan,'' said ''Brother'' Hekmatyar, as his associates refer to him. ''Before 1973? That was never an Islamic system. It was completely against Islam.''

The leader was less forthcoming when asked to define the differences between the ''pure'' Islam he advocates and the traditional system of the past. The rule of King Mohammad Zahir Shah, who led the deeply Moslem country for 40 years, was not Islamic, Mr. Hekmatyar said.

''Islam says the ruler should be elected by the people,'' he said. ''Not Zahir Shah.'' Purity but No Details

Unlike the other rebel leaders, Mr. Hekmatyar, who is aware of the impression his words make in the Western press, was reluctant to spell out his philosophy of ''pure'' Islam as a political and social system.

When asked about the application of Islamic law, with stern corporal punishment including amputation of limbs or stoning to death of offending women, he replied, ''Islam will be implemented in all aspects.''

Asked about education for women, Mr. Hekmatyar said the Koran requires education for all. As for whether women should be educated like men -as doctors, engineers or lawyers, he said: ''There are some differences. Each class should be educated according to its nature. It will be decided in the future.''

Islamic fundamentalists believe that women should be educated for nothing but strict observance of the faith, with a stress on domestic life.

In 1986, when the seven leaders were invited to meet President Reagan, Mr. Hekmatyar was one of three who boycotted the reception. ''I was not in favor of it,'' he said. ''We didn't want the world to think the war in Afghanistan is a struggle between the two superpowers, and I was afraid America would compromise with Gorbachev over Afghanistan.'' Good Share of U.S. Aid

Nonetheless, Western officials said Mr. Hekmatyar continued to receive a significant share of the American arms aid, which is largely distributed by Pakistani intelligence agencies.

His favored treatment by Pakistani intelligence is believed to stem from the fact that he found refuge there at least three years before Soviet troops moved into Afghanistan, and has since maintained close relations with the military and intelligence agencies.

A well-known Islamic student leader at Kabul University, he fled here after an unsuccessful uprising against the leftward trend of the Government of President Mohammad Daud. Pakistan favored him because of his opposition to the creation of a separatist state of Pushtun tribesmen, who live on both sides of the border. The separatist threat has been a major concern of Pakistani governments since the founding of their state in the late 1940's.