A NATION CHALLENGED - THE MUSLIM WORLD - 56 Islamic ...DOHA, Qatar, Oct. 10— Fifty-six Islamic nations holding an emergency meeting here issued a statement today that avoided directly condemning the United States' attacks against the Taliban in Afghanistan, while warning against inflicting civilian casualties or striking against other Arab states.

If the statement's language seemed murky, Washington policy makers could still breathe a deep sigh of relief at moving past a first test of their bombing raids. The emergency gathering of the Organization of the Islamic Conference had been called by Iran. Evidence of significant opposition could have shredded American efforts to build an alliance that included Arabs and Muslims against Osama bin Laden and other terrorists.

Still, the communiqué clearly and succinctly expressed the various Islamic governments' central concern -- self-preservation, saying, ''The conference rejected the targeting of any Islamic or Arab state under the pretext of fighting terrorism.''

The careful wording reflected the complex pressures and fears that weigh on Arab and Muslim governments, whose own legitimacy is often precarious. The conference, representing 1.2 billion Muslims from Africa and Asia, as well as the Middle East, dedicated one sentence to finding fault with the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, which cost more than 5,000 lives.

''These terrorist acts contradict the teaching of all religions and human and moral values,'' the statement said.

In perhaps the closest expression of outright support for America, the spokesman for the conference, the Qatar foreign minister, Sheik Hamad bin Jasim bin Jabir al-Thani, said the raids into Afghanistan were understandable. ''We don't blame the United States, because what happened in the United States is a big tragedy,'' he told a news conference at the end of the meeting. ''Six thousand people were killed in one day, and they were killed by terrorist action.

''We don't generally support military action. But then again, we don't support terrorism either, and we also have to identify terrorism and see its causes, which is why we asked for it to be discussed at the United Nations in the future.''

Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal of Saudi Arabia told reporters that Muslim states wanted to help ''eradicate terrorism, which harms the Islamic world and Islamic causes and has never served the Palestinian cause.''

The tepid statements reflected the fears of some governments, including those of Egypt, Indonesia, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the gulf sheikdoms, that further American actions could inflame their populations and destabilize their governments.

There were also more immediate fears. Officials in Iraq, particularly, but also in Iran, Libya, Sudan, Syria and the Bekaa in central Lebanon worry that their areas could be potential targets of American strikes.

Syria, Iraq and Iran have openly criticized the American raids. At the meeting today, they were said to have pressed for criticism of the United States but were rebuffed by more moderate states led by Egypt and Saudi Arabia.

The emir of Qatar, Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, current president of the Islamic conference, welcomed the delegates with an acknowledgment of the horror of the attacks on Sept. 11, coupled with a cautionary note to the United States.

''We assert our utter rejection of these attacks and assert that those confronting them must not touch innocent civilians and must not extend beyond those who carried out those attacks,'' he said. ''This requires the existence of irrefutable evidence against the perpetrators and that military operations, after announcing the evidence, be limited to them alone.''

But, like the other Arab leaders here, the emir swiftly tried to draw a distinction between the kind of terrorism attributed to Mr. bin Laden and what they call the ''resistance to occupation'' on the part of Palestinians. At the same time, the Arab leaders tried to link the Palestinian cause to efforts to eliminate the roots of terrorism.

Emir al-Thani accused Israel of practicing ''state terrorism'' against Palestinians, who, he said, ''have no choice but to struggle.

''The only way to put an end to this vicious circle is to enable the Palestinian people to practice their legitimate rights, notably their right to self-determination, and to allow the establishment of an independent state with its capital Jerusalem.''

The Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, addressed the conference, accusing Israel of taking advantage of the attention and outrage focused on the attacks on America. ''While the world is busy with the American tragedy,'' Mr. Arafat said, ''the Israeli government is using its military might to escalate its aggression against our people and to reoccupy our land.''

There were also calls among the delegates that the United Nations, rather than the United States, handle the matter.

''We would like to see an internationally led campaign,'' said Amr Moussa, secretary general of the Arab League, whose foreign ministers held a preliminary meeting here on Tuesday night. ''Terrorism is a global phenomenon, and any action against it is best addressed through the United Nations.''

Photo: Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal of Saudi Arabia conferred with his Algerian counterpart, Abdelaziz Belkhadim, yesterday at the emergency gathering of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. (Karim Jaafar/Agence France-Presse)