Briton and Frenchman Tentatively Identified in Islamic State ...LONDON — A Briton and a Frenchman were tentatively identified on Monday among a group of executioners seen in video clips released a day earlier by the Islamic State militant group that announced the beheading of an American aid worker.

The identifications were made by a British father whose son had traveled to Syria to join the Islamic State, and by senior French officials who saw in the video footage a French citizen they had been monitoring for years.

Their assertions seemed likely to deepen apprehension about the role of foreign-born jihadists in the conflict and the possible hazards of their return to native lands.

Thousands of young European Muslims have been reported as traveling to join the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, in its campaign to revive a caliphate in areas under its control. The battle sharpened significantly in June when the Islamists flooded from Syria into Iraq.

The militant group distributed a video on Sunday showing that it had beheaded a fifth Western hostage, Peter Kassig, an American aid worker and a former Army Ranger. The video showed a masked executioner with a British accent who has been nicknamed “Jihadi John” in British news media accounts of earlier executions.

British news reports on Monday said the father of another Briton who had joined ISIS thought the footage included a man who resembled his son. The father, Ahmed Muthana, from Cardiff, Wales, said, however, that he was “not quite sure” that the image showed his son Nasser, who reportedly traveled to Syria in June along with his brother Aseel to join the militants.

“I was shown a picture of the video,” Mr. Muthana said. “I cannot confirm it is him, but I think it might be.”

At the same time, the Paris prosecutor, François Molins, told a news conference in Paris that a Frenchman, Maxime Hauchard, had been identified in the footage.

Mr. Molins said Mr. Hauchard, a 22-year-old from Normandy who converted to Islam at 17, left France for Syria in August 2013 under the false pretext of humanitarian work.

“In reality, like others, humanitarian work was only a facade,” Mr. Molins said. “It appears clearly that he got involved in the fighting and joined the Islamic State.”

Mr. Hauchard initially came to the attention of the French authorities in 2011, after he joined radical groups and frequented websites preaching jihad.

The French interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, was not as definitive as Mr. Molins. Still, he said, an analysis by the French intelligence services showed a “strong possibility that a French citizen was directly involved in these despicable crimes.”

Earlier this year, Mr. Hauchard described in a Skype interview with the television channel BFM TV how he had traveled freely to Syria and joined the Islamic State, which “established the laws of Allah on earth.”

“It’s funny because in general people think that we have a sort of guru behind us that fills your head with stuff,” Mr. Hauchard said in the interview from the eastern Syrian city of Raqqa, which the Islamic State controls and considers its capital. “But in fact I didn’t meet anyone. I would have loved to meet a brother.”

Mr. Hauchard spoke from a barracks where he was living with about 40 people, “mostly Arabs,” he said. He told BFM that he was getting trained before “leaving for an operation.”

The beheadings have been depicted by militants as revenge for Western military actions in the war against the Islamic State. British and French warplanes have joined the American-led bombing campaign against militant targets in Iraq.

Separately, in a case marked by extraordinary secrecy, a British judge on Monday lifted some reporting restrictions in a high-profile terrorism trial, enabling news media to report that a 26-year-old law student had been found guilty last week of one terrorism-related charge and had been sent for retrial on another.

The defendant, Erol Incedal, has denied accusations that he had been planning to attack prominent individuals such as Tony Blair, the former prime minister, or to launch a broader attack modeled on the 2008 assault in Mumbai, India, in which more than 160 people were killed.

On Monday, journalists were permitted to report that, six days earlier, after nearly 24 hours of deliberations, a jury found Mr. Incedal guilty of possessing a bomb-making document likely to be useful to a terrorist, but that it could not reach a verdict on the second charge, that he had been planning an assault. The jury was discharged and a retrial was ordered for February.

Mr. Incedal’s trial “was surrounded by almost-unprecedented secrecy, with the public and the press excluded from two-thirds of the hearing,” The Guardian newspaper reported.