John Cantlie, British Hostage, Seen in ISIS Video Apparently From ...LONDON — A British hostage of the Islamic State has been shown in a video, apparently made in the beleaguered Syrian town of Kobani near the Turkish border, depicting him as a combat correspondent and forecasting that the town is about to fall to militants despite waves of American airstrikes.

The video, about five and a half minutes long, suggests a further evolution in the militants’ command of media technology to promote their cause, using the techniques of 24-hour news channel journalism to counter the West’s accounts of what is happening in Kobani.

Punctuated by the rattle of machine-gun fire, the clip begins with aerial views of the town, apparently a further indication of the militants’ use of surveillance drones.

“Hello, I’m John Cantlie,” the hostage says, dressed in black, “and today we are in the city of Kobani on the Syrian-Turkish border. That is, in fact, Turkey right behind me.”

He gestures over his shoulder and refers scathingly to the absence of Western journalists in the town. All he can see, he says, are large numbers of Islamic State fighters — although no combatants or combat are shown in the video.

The video showing Mr. Cantlie, a British photojournalist who was abducted over two years ago, was released late Monday. In it, he says, “Now the battle for Kobani is coming to an end.”

The images could not immediately be verified, and it was not clear when the video was made. The British Foreign Office said it was “analyzing its contents.”

On the ground on Tuesday, news reports said, a contingent of Iraqi Kurds was preparing to fly to Turkey after the government in Ankara agreed to allow Kurdish reinforcements to cross the border into Syria. American officials also reported four more airstrikes against militant positions in Kobani, the latest in a battle for the town that has lasted more than a month and claimed hundreds of lives.

The fate of Kobani has become a touchstone of the Western campaign against the Islamic State, with the battle — and American airstrikes in support of Kurdish defenders — unfolding in full view of journalists, spectators and Turkish troops just across the border.

Mr. Cantlie has been seen in a series of videos seemingly filmed by the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, explaining the militants’ strategy as they seek to establish an Islamic caliphate extending across territory in Syria and Iraq.

His appearances have been in marked contrast to the horrific images of four other hostages — two American and two British — who appear to have been beheaded while kneeling in a bare landscape, clad in orange and explaining their plight as a consequence of Western actions against the militants.

While Kobani is known as Ayn al-Arab in Arabic, in the video it is referred to as Ayn al-Islam.

Calling Islamic State combatants mujahedeen, or holy warriors, Mr. Cantlie says they “are just mopping up now, street to street, and building to building.”

“You can occasionally hear sporadic gunfire in the background as a result of those operations,” he says.

“But contrary to what the Western media would have you believe, it is not an all-out battle here now,” Mr. Cantlie says, accusing Western reporters of being misled by official American and Kurdish accounts of the battle. “It is nearly over. As you can hear, it is very quiet, just the occasional gunfire.”

Mr. Cantlie says that American airstrikes deterred the militants from using tanks, forcing them into house-to-house fighting with lighter weapons. But he mocks the United States Air Force as “hopeless” for mistakenly airdropping supplies intended for Kurdish defenders “straight into the outstretched arms of the mujahedeen.”

“Two hundred thousand inhabitants of the city have been displaced because of the fighting that came here,” he adds. “You can see the refugee camps over my right shoulder over there in Turkey, where the inhabitants now are. But contrary to media reports, the fighting in Kobani is nearly over.”

“Urban warfare is as about as nasty and tough as it gets, and it’s something of a specialty of the mujahedeen,” he says.