The Strength or Weakness of the Shadowy Jihadist Group ISIS ...Ben Hubbard, a Middle East correspondent, reported this week that the Islamic State’s momentum appears to be stalling and that the group may not be as powerful as it once appeared. We asked him how he has tracked the growth of the terrorist organization.

My coverage of the Islamic State comes out of what was supposed to be my central job, which originally was covering the Syrian civil war. The Islamic State, or ISIS, first announced its presence in Syria last year, but there were so many other rebel groups around that it took awhile for us to realize that we were dealing with a completely different kind of group in terms of its abilities and ambitions. So as ISIS grew and took over more territory, it became a larger part of my beat.



But accurately reporting on a group that you have no direct access to (and whose members would chop your head off if they got the chance) is difficult. There is no ISIS spokesman we can call to get comment on events. And the group runs a very slick propaganda campaign on social media, full of high-quality videos and photos, that can tell you something about it, but of course only what the group itself wants to tell you.

So we are left with a variety of sources that include social media output by ISIS and its opponents; phone and Skype contact with people who live or travel in ISIS-controlled areas; and government officials and private analysts who track the group using their own methods.

I think that once you discard the propaganda and reports that there is no way of confirming, we do get an accurate general picture of what the group is up to in terms of where it is winning or losing battles. What I wish we had more of a real sense of is what life is like inside of ISIS areas. I would love to walk around in one of its cities, sit in one of its schools or interview normal people who have to rely on its services, but that is just not possible.

As for this story, I felt that the news media in general — which has rightly been alarmed at ISIS’ brutal tactics — had perhaps given the impression that the group was stronger and more powerful than it actually is. My reporting suggested that although we can expect ISIS to be part of the map for some time to come, there are a number of factors that will most likely limit its ability to grow further and could actually cause it to lose ground.

I guess there is always a risk in suggesting how any group will fare in the future, but we do it with sports teams, political parties and celebrities, so why not with jihadist groups? I felt comfortable enough with the information available to assess the group’s prospects. Events could prove me wrong, but I doubt they will.