Gay Marriage Opponents Set to Continue Court Battle - NYTimes.comLeading opponents of same-sex marriage vowed on Wednesday to push ahead with their legal fight, noting that several federal appeals courts had not yet ruled on the issue and that the Supreme Court could still decide to leave it up to the states.

Even as the list of states authorizing same-sex marriage swells, the opponents noted Justice Anthony M. Kennedy’s order on Wednesday to temporarily block a federal appeals court ruling striking down the marriage restrictions in Idaho. The temporary order came as a surprise to many advocates on both sides of the issue, since the Supreme Court on Monday had allowed similar decisions from three other appeals courts to take effect.

“The marriage battle will continue,” said Jim Campbell, a senior legal counsel at Alliance Defending Freedom, a Christian legal group that has defended marriage restrictions in several states.

Mr. Campbell said that while it was unclear whether the temporary stay imposed by Justice Kennedy would be prolonged — gay rights advocates predicted that it would be lifted within days, perhaps after Justice Kennedy consulted the rest of the court — his hesitation “suggests that the marriage question will continue to be litigated and that the Supreme Court hasn’t decided this issue one way or another.”

The opponents disputed the assessments of many legal experts, who have said it appears all but inevitable that the remaining state bans on same-sex marriage will be struck down. Rather, the opponents argued that Monday’s Supreme Court action, which had the effect of permitting same-sex marriage in five states and may soon overturn bans in six more, was not necessarily a sign that the court would establish such marriages as a nationwide right.

Instead, they see a good chance that when the Supreme Court directly considers the issues, it will “rule in favor of the people’s right to define marriage as it has always been defined,” as the National Organization for Marriage put it.

The cases now making their way through appeals courts, legal experts agree, may well yield one or more decisions in favor of state marriage restrictions and all but force the Supreme Court to take a case for a fuller ruling on the issue.

Advocates for gay rights, as well as many independent legal scholars, say the opponents are engaged in wishful thinking. They say that the Supreme Court, with Monday’s decision not to intervene in appeals-court findings in favor of same-sex marriage, knowingly unleashed a current that will be unstoppable.

“The shift toward marriage equality is overwhelming, in popular opinion, among elected officials and in the courts,” said Suzanne B. Goldberg, the director of the Center for Gender and Sexuality Law at Columbia Law School. “It’s extremely hard to imagine that marriage equality won’t be the ultimate national resolution.”

The opponents pin their legal hopes in part on the mixed messages in the Supreme Court’s 5-to-4 decision last year, in United States v. Windsor, that struck down part of the Defense of Marriage Act. The majority opinion, as well as the dissenting views, asserted that the states have primary control over marriage policies.

But the majority also emphasized that state laws were subject to constitutional protections and went on to find that excluding gay and lesbian couples from marriage caused unjustified injury and stigma to them and their children.

Since that ruling, in June 2013, dozens of federal and state judges, as well as four United States Courts of Appeals so far, have cited those findings about illegal discrimination as they struck down state marriage restrictions.

Only one federal judge, in Louisiana, has ruled in favor of a state’s ban on same-sex marriage. The total number of states permitting same-sex marriages is now 25.

Bans appear nearly certain to be overturned soon, as well, in nine more states within the four federal circuits that have ruled so far.

One of them, Colorado, has already started issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples. But officials in Kansas, South Carolina and Wyoming said they would fight in court to preserve their bans.

While admitting that Monday’s Supreme Court action was a serious setback, opponents of same-sex marriage found a silver lining in the court’s decision not to hear arguments on the underlying issues.

“If the liberals on the court had the votes to declare same-sex marriage a constitutional right, why didn’t they take any of the cases on offer Monday?” asked Brian Brown, the president of the National Organization for Marriage.

“That gives hope that the Supreme Court will not launch another Roe v. Wade,” Mr. Brown said, referring to the 1973 decision legalizing abortion nationwide.

Mr. Brown also rejected the argument that, once same-sex marriages had been allowed in many states, the law could not be rolled back if the voters wanted to do so.

In California, he noted, marriages were allowed by court order and then halted for a period by Proposition 8.

But most legal experts drew the opposite conclusion from Monday’s action.

“We know, from the court’s willingness Monday to allow all these marriages to go forward,” that opponents of same-sex marriage “are virtually guaranteed to lose” before the current Supreme Court, said Michael C. Dorf, a constitutional expert at Cornell Law School.

Whether or not they view Monday’s decision as a turning point, lawyers for both sides are digging in for more court battles at every level. Dozens of challenges to state marriage restrictions are still pending in courts across the country.

Advocates had assumed that most of these cases might be put on hold as the Supreme Court considered one of the cases it rejected on Monday. Now, with the near-term involvement of the Supreme Court uncertain, “each one of these cases could be the decider for that state or that circuit,” noted James D. Esseks, director of gay rights issues for the American Civil Liberties Union.

“From the litigators’ perspective,” he said, Monday’s decision “means more work, not less work.”

Opponents of same-sex marriage like Mr. Campbell and Mr. Brown say their goal at this point is not to return to the days when it was illegal everywhere, but to allow individual states to decide, whether through legislation or plebiscite.

Mr. Brown said that his group would also press for a constitutional amendment declaring the right of states to define marriage and that, in the coming elections, it would target Republicans who strayed from the traditional line on marriage.

At the same time, Mr. Campbell and others say, they will step up the fight for what they call “religious liberty” protections — the right of individuals and businesses to refuse to participate in same-sex marriages, which is already a subject of growing litigation.

Some conservative religious leaders have resigned themselves to the seemingly unstoppable spread of same-sex marriage but call on their followers to prepare for the long haul. They suggest responding not with hatred or a siege mentality but with what Russell Moore, chief of the public policy arm of the Southern Baptist Convention, called “cultural persuasion.”

“Let’s articulate a Christian vision of what marriage should be, and let’s embody that vision in our churches,” Mr. Moore said in a blog post this week. “Let’s love our gay and lesbian neighbors.”