Same-Sex Marriage Ruling Echoes as West Virginia Relents and ...A Supreme Court order legalizing same-sex marriage in five states reverberated further on Thursday, with the attorney general of West Virginia conceding that its ban on same-sex marriage was no longer defensible but South Carolina officials vowing to keep fighting to restrict marriage to a man and a woman.

Since the Supreme Court decision on Monday and a ruling from a federal circuit court on Tuesday, new developments have appeared almost hourly as gay-rights advocates press for action in nine other states: Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Kansas, Montana, North Carolina, South Carolina, West Virginia and Wyoming.

These states are bound by law to accept the rulings of their federal circuit courts once the Supreme Court has allowed them to stand. But as the contrasting responses by West Virginia and South Carolina show, their paths to same-sex marriage can vary markedly.

Experts said that it could take several weeks for the issue to be resolved in South Carolina, but that the state’s legal defeat appeared all but certain.

Colorado began issuing same-sex marriage licenses almost immediately after Monday’s Supreme Court action. A federal court there had already declared the state’s ban unconstitutional, but the judges had blocked their decision while waiting to see how the Supreme Court would respond to similar rulings from Utah and Oklahoma, which share the same circuit.

With the concession by the West Virginia attorney general, followed by the governor’s directive to state agencies to comply with the new legal reality, same-sex weddings seemed imminent.

“Our expectation is that clerks across the state will comply and begin issuing marriage licenses,” said Susan Sommer, director of constitutional litigation at Lambda Legal, a civil rights group that helped bring a lawsuit in West Virginia.

But in states where officials choose to keep fighting — including, so far, Kansas, North Carolina, South Carolina and Wyoming — a federal district court would have to take formal action to strike down bans.

In each of these states, a federal lawsuit challenging marriage restrictions was already in the courts. Now, gay-rights advocates are asking judges for quick findings in their favor, while officials are responding that the higher-court rulings do not necessarily apply or that they should have new chances to appeal to the Supreme Court.

North Carolina legislators, for example, argued in a court brief on Thursday that the decision of the Fourth Circuit appeals court striking down Virginia’s ban on same-sex marriage should not be controlling because Virginia’s attorney general had conceded the case from the start.

But in the end, states in the four circuits that have conclusively rejected bans on same-sex marriage “will have no leg to stand on,” said Dale Carpenter, a professor of civil rights law at the University of Minnesota Law School. “They are delaying something that is inevitable.”

In North Carolina on Wednesday night, the American Civil Liberties Union asked the federal court hearing existing marriage cases to render an immediate judgment permitting same-sex marriage.

The state’s attorney general is not opposing the measure. But leaders in the legislature are, and they hired John C. Eastman, a conservative legal expert from California, to help. They filed a countermotion on Thursday to ensure “that the choice made by North Carolina voters receives its day in court.”

James D. Esseks, a lawyer at the A.C.L.U., said he still hoped that the federal judge would issue a ruling within a day or two. “In short order,” he predicted, “same-sex couples in North Carolina will be able to get married.”

The process appears likely to be protracted in South Carolina, where it has already been more tangled. A probate judge in Charleston County started, on his own, to accept applications for marriage licenses from gay and lesbian couples. On Thursday, the state attorney general obtained an order from the South Carolina Supreme Court forbidding the judge to do so pending a decision in the federal lawsuit challenging the state’s marriage laws.

The judge has asked each side to file briefs by Oct. 15. That could be followed by weeks of back-and-forth responses.

The circuit-court ruling on Tuesday struck down same-sex marriage bans in Nevada and Idaho. Officials in Idaho asked the Supreme Court to block that ruling, and it has done so temporarily. In a brief filed Thursday, lawyers for gay couples in Idaho urged Justice Anthony M. Kennedy to lift that stay and allow same-sex marriages to begin.

Idaho had provided no reason, they argued, to believe that its appeal of a circuit-court decision overturning its ban would succeed.