Indiana Finds It's Not So Easy to Buck Gay Marriage Trend ...INDIANAPOLIS — Dominated by Republicans and steeped in traditional values, Indiana seemed among the least likely places to become a battleground in the nation’s debate over same-sex marriage when the legislature overwhelmingly chose in 2011 to push forward a state constitutional amendment barring gay couples from marrying.

But in the two years since, the landscape has shifted as voters, lawmakers and courts began recognizing same-sex marriage in places like Maryland, Minnesota, New Jersey and New Mexico and as the United States Supreme Court declared parts of the federal Defense of Marriage Act unconstitutional. In just the past few days, a federal judge struck down a ban on same-sex marriage in Utah, home of the Mormon Church, and a federal appeals court rejected a request to halt the marriages on Tuesday. A federal judge in Ohio found that same-sex marriages should be recognized on death certificates.

So suddenly Indiana, where lawmakers in the coming weeks are expected to call for the second vote needed to put a ban before voters in the fall elections, is now in a far more tense, unpredictable and closely watched spot than anyone here had imagined — a test case in whether a state will impose new limits on same-sex marriage in this fast-moving political and legal environment.

“What happens in Indiana is critical,” said Brian Brown, president of the National Organization for Marriage, which opposes same-sex marriage. He and other opponents hope the outcome here will reveal that shifts in public sentiment over the last few years are not as widespread as some may think.

Supporters of same-sex marriage, however, are pouring money and effort into defeating the measure in Indiana, a possibility that seemed unthinkable not long ago but one that advocates now insist is conceivable. They say victory in a conservative place like Indiana would be a turning point in a fight that has largely been waged in more predictable, left-leaning states or in the courts. “That would send a clear message to opponents of marriage equality that it’s time to be done fighting this battle,” said Sarah Warbelow, state legislative director of the Human Rights Campaign.

As lawmakers prepare to return for a new legislative session in January, it is an especially awkward spot for Republicans, who dominate both chambers of the General Assembly. With an election year ahead and the risk of primaries in May, the issue is pitting socially conservative groups, who are urging a constitutional ban, against sometime allies in the state’s business community, who say a ban could cause Indiana economic harm.

Few Republicans now seem eager to talk about the issue, and some legislative aides said it was not entirely certain who would formally file the legislation in January.

In a speech to lawmakers last month, Representative Brian C. Bosma, the Republican House speaker, ticked off a list of top priorities ahead, including preschool education, road funding and business tax policy, before adding, “And yes, while it’s not high on the agenda, we all know we have to deal with whether Hoosiers should be entrusted with the important decision of the marriage amendment.”

And Gov. Mike Pence, a conservative during his years in Congress, has said he favors traditional marriage, but observers say he has not put the current question of a constitutional ban at the center of his agenda in recent months. His signature is not needed to send the matter to voters in November if legislators approve it a second time.

To hear some Democrats tell it, many Republicans here would just as soon see the issue fade away, as they ponder navigating between socially conservative primary voters and a broader array of voters in a general election.

“The tables have turned on this issue, and the Republican members are at a loss about what to do about it,” said Representative Scott Pelath, the House minority leader. “They’re quaking in their boots about what will happen if they don’t pass this thing. But they’re fearful about what will happen down the road if they do.”

Indiana might well have answered this question years ago if not for complications in its process for amending the State Constitution and for shifting partisan control in the legislature. By state statute, Indiana has long barred same-sex couples from marrying. But a decade of efforts to add the measure to the Constitution were slowed by the process required here — two votes by separately elected legislatures, then a decision by voters statewide — and by roadblocks from Democrats who held a majority in the Indiana House for a stretch before 2011.

With firm Republican control of both chambers in 2011, the ban advanced with wide margins. Elections in 2012 further strengthened Republican control, giving supporters of the amendment added reason to expect easy passage a second time.