Appeals Court Rejects Utah's Ban on Gay Marriage, Prodding ...DENVER — Expanding a streak of legal victories for same-sex marriage, a federal appeals court ruled on Wednesday that states may not deny same-sex couples their “fundamental right” to marry, overturning Utah’s voter-approved ban on such unions.

Advocates for same-sex marriage hailed the 2-1 decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit here in Denver as a historic win. It had special resonance because it sprang from a legal challenge that brought jubilant scenes of gay nuptials to the socially conservative Utah heartland in December, when a lower court first struck down the state’s ban.

Since then, judges from Arkansas to Michigan to Idaho have tossed out prohibitions on same-sex marriages, with the most recent ruling coming Wednesday as a federal judge struck down Indiana’s ban. But legal observers said the Utah ruling was significant because it was the first time a federal appeals panel had found that same-sex couples have a constitutional right to marry.

“They desire not to redefine the institution but to participate in it,” Judge Carlos F. Lucero, nominated by President Bill Clinton, wrote in the majority opinion. Judge Jerome A. Holmes, nominated by President George W. Bush, joined Judge Lucero in striking down Utah’s ban, while Judge Paul J. Kelly Jr., a nominee of the elder President George Bush, dissented.

The judges immediately stayed their ruling, and Utah’s attorney general, Sean Reyes, said his office would appeal the case to the United States Supreme Court. Numerous lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of same-sex marriage bans are percolating through the legal system, and the Supreme Court could confront the issue next year.

Ordinarily, a decision from a federal appeals court striking down a state constitutional amendment that had been passed by two-thirds of voters would be a prime candidate for Supreme Court review. But a second criterion may make the justices cautious: They often wait for several federal appeals courts to rule before wading into an issue. Decisions from other appeals courts are expected soon. Should any of them sustain a ban on same-sex marriage, creating a conflict with the 10th Circuit’s decision, Supreme Court review would be all but assured.

The appeals court’s stay of its own ruling did not keep officials in the deep-blue college town of Boulder, Colo., from seizing the moment. Saying the 10th Circuit’s decision applied to Colorado, which does not allow same-sex marriage, the county clerk’s office began issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples Wednesday afternoon. It appears unlikely they will be honored.

In overturning the ban Utah voters passed in 2004, the judges spoke of liberty and equal protection and drew comparisons between outlawing same-sex unions and unconstitutional laws against interracial marriage.

“To claim that marriage, by definition, excludes certain couples is simply to insist that those couples may not marry because they have historically been denied the right to do so,” the judges wrote. “One might just as easily have argued that interracial couples are by definition excluded from the institution of marriage.”

The opinion was animated by other gay rights cases, in particular a Supreme Court ruling last June that struck down part of the Defense of Marriage Act, which had denied federal benefits to same-sex couples. That case, United States v. Windsor, was a landmark victory for supporters of gay rights, but it did not address the question of whether it is unconstitutional for states to ban same-sex marriages.

That issue, the appeals court judges wrote on Wednesday, is now in “full bloom.”

“May a state of the union constitutionally deny a citizen the benefit or protection of the laws of the state based solely upon the sex of the person that citizen chooses to marry?” the judges wrote. They concluded, “The State of Utah may not do so.”

In April, the same panel heard arguments in a similar challenge to Oklahoma’s ban on same-sex marriage. That case was not part of Wednesday’s decision.

The three couples who sued Utah and two of their lawyers said they were elated by the decision, calling it a major legal milestone that could ripple from the mountains of Utah to the steps of the Supreme Court.

“I couldn’t be happier,” said Derek Kitchen, the lead plaintiff in the case, Kitchen v. Herbert. “I’m just trying to take it all in.” (The named defendant is Gov. Gary R. Herbert, a Republican.)

Judge Kelly’s dissent heartened opponents of same-sex marriage. He found that same sex-couples have “no such fundamental right,” and that requiring that states recognize same-sex unions “turns the notion of a limited national government on its head.”

The appeals court’s decision upheld a federal district judge’s sweeping ruling in December overturning Utah’s ban. That judge, Robert J. Shelby, who was appointed by President Obama with support from conservative Utah politicians, also said the ban violated the fundamental right of same-sex couples to marry. Within minutes, hundreds of gay couples were racing to county clerks’ offices and exchanging vows in impromptu ceremonies.

State officials rushed to halt the marriages, calling the situation legal chaos. After 17 days and an unsuccessful appeal to the 10th Circuit, the United States Supreme Court stepped in and issued a stay, effectively suspending Judge Shelby’s ruling and temporarily reinstating the ban. But more than 1,000 couples had married, and many had changed their names, signed up for spousal health insurance and taken steps to become legal parents of children they were raising.

Today, their status is the subject of a separate legal fight. The American Civil Liberties Unions sued Utah on behalf of several same-sex partners after the state said it would stop granting new benefits to such couples, but would not try to claw back benefits it had already given.

Last month, a federal judge said that Utah had to recognize the marriages performed and grant those couples the same rights and benefits as married opposite-sex partners.

In the Indiana case, a federal judge in Indianapolis ruled that the state’s ban on same-sex marriage violated the United States Constitution. The judge, Richard L. Young, the chief judge of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of Indiana, noted the string of federal rulings in issuing his own decision.

“In less than a year, every Federal District Court to consider the issue has reached the same conclusion in thoughtful and thorough opinions — laws prohibiting the celebration and recognition of same-sex marriages are unconstitutional,” Judge Young wrote. “It is clear that the fundamental right to marry shall not be deprived to some individuals based solely on the person they choose to love. In time, Americans will look at the marriage of couples such as plaintiffs, and refer to it simply as a marriage — not a same-sex marriage.”

Shortly after the ruling, which arose from several challenges to the ban, same-sex couples began receiving marriage licenses in the Marion County clerk’s office in Indianapolis. “It’s crazy busy,” an official there said. The ruling also required Indiana to recognize licenses from other states.

Bryan Corbin, a spokesman for the Indiana attorney general, said that the office and two county clerks had filed a notice of appeal and an emergency motion seeking a stay of the ruling.