Oklahoma's Ban on Gay Marriage Is Unconstitutional, Judge Rules ...A federal judge in Oklahoma ruled Tuesday that the state’s constitutional amendment barring same-sex marriage violated the federal Constitution, the latest in a string of legal victories for gay rights and one that occurred in the heart of the Bible Belt.

The state’s ban on marriage by gay and lesbian couples is “an arbitrary, irrational exclusion of just one class of Oklahoma citizens from a governmental benefit,” wrote Judge Terence C. Kern of United States District Court for the Northern District of Oklahoma, in Tulsa, deciding a case that had languished for nine years. The amendment, he said, is based on “moral disapproval” and does not advance the state’s asserted interests in promoting heterosexual marriage or the welfare of children.

“We’re jubilant, we’re over the moon,” said one of the plaintiffs, Sharon Baldwin, 45, who has lived with her partner and co-plaintiff, Mary Bishop, 52, for 17 years.

The two both work as editors at The Tulsa World newspaper and had just arrived at work on Tuesday afternoon when the city editor told them of the decision.

“We’re taking the day off,” Ms. Baldwin said.

The decision will not take effect immediately, and an appeal is almost certain, leaving prospects uncertain for gay couples.

“We are disappointed in the ruling,” said District Attorney Tim Harris of Tulsa County, who represented the Tulsa County clerk, a defendant because the office issues marriage licenses. “We will need to review the decision and talk with our client” about appeal options, he said.

The ruling comes less than a month after a federal judge in Utah reached the same conclusion, declaring that state’s restrictive marriage amendment unconstitutional. Some 1,300 couples rushed to marry before Utah obtained a temporary stay from the United States Supreme Court, blocking further marriages while the issue is considered by a federal appeals court.

Gay rights advocates in Oklahoma will not enjoy a similar window of marriage opportunity. In view of the Utah ruling, Judge Kern, who was appointed by President Bill Clinton in 1994, stayed his decision in anticipation of an appeal by Oklahoma to the same appeals court where the Utah case is being heard, the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, in Denver.

With so many marriages in limbo, the Utah appeal is on an expedited schedule, with written arguments due by late February. It is unclear whether an appeal by Oklahoma would proceed in tandem or on a slower schedule.

Over the past year, the number of states authorizing same-sex marriage, whether through legislation or court order, has grown to 17, or 18 if Utah is included.

But Tuesday’s decision was only the third time that a federal court has acted to void a state constitutional amendment on marriage, following the Utah decision in December and a 2010 ruling in California that eventually overturned Proposition 8.

In New Mexico in December and New Jersey in October, state supreme courts ruled in favor of same-sex marriage, calling discrimination illegal under state constitutions. These followed similar state-level judicial decisions in Connecticut, Iowa and Massachusetts.

In 11 other states, most recently Hawaii and Illinois, same-sex marriage was approved by legislatures or by popular vote.

More than 30 states have passed amendments or laws restricting marriage to a man and a woman. Buoyed by a Supreme Court decision in June that declared parts of the federal Defense of Marriage Act unconstitutional, advocates have filed dozens of lawsuits to challenge the bans.

The Oklahoma amendment under question, stating that “marriage in this state shall consist only of the union of one man and one woman,” was adopted by referendum in 2004 with 75 percent of the vote.

The challenge to the amendment was filed soon after by two lesbian couples. Ms. Baldwin and Ms. Bishop sought the right to marry, while Gay Phillips and Susan Barton, who were legally married in California, sought recognition of their status by the state, which is under the strong control of Republican conservatives.

Judge Kern found that his court did not have jurisdiction over the second question, whether Oklahoma must honor a same-sex marriage performed in another state.

But with his decision against the state’s own ban on such marriages, “Judge Kern has come to the conclusion that so many have before him — that the fundamental equality of lesbian and gay couples is guaranteed by the United States Constitution,” said Chad Griffin, president of the Human Rights Campaign in Washington, in a statement Tuesday.