Gay-Marriage Bans Fall in Wisconsin and Indiana - NYTimes.comOnly nine days after hearing arguments in the case, a federal appeals court in Chicago declared the bans on same-sex marriage in Indiana and Wisconsin to be unconstitutional on Thursday, adding to the list of marriage cases that could wind up before the Supreme Court in the year ahead.

“The grounds advanced by Indiana and Wisconsin for their discriminatory policies are not only conjectural; they are totally implausible,” said the unanimous opinion by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, as it confirmed lower-court decisions that reversed marriage restrictions in the two states.

The ruling by the Seventh Circuit joins similar appeals-court decisions that overturned same-sex marriage bans in Oklahoma, Utah and Virginia, with still other circuit court rulings on marriage expected in the weeks ahead.

In each case so far, the rulings to permit same-sex marriages have been temporarily stayed, pending action by the Supreme Court, and the same appeared likely for Indiana and Wisconsin.

Thursday’s opinion was issued with unusual speed and written by Judge Richard A. Posner, an appointee of President Ronald Reagan who is known for his tart words and independent thought.

“We’ll see that the governments of Indiana and Wisconsin have given us no reason to think they have a ‘reasonable basis’ for forbidding same-sex marriage,” Judge Posner wrote near the opening of the 40-page opinion.

The argument that allowing same-sex marriage will somehow undermine the protection of children in heterosexual marriages, the court said, “is so full of holes that it cannot be taken seriously.”

Both states argued that their electorates should have the right to continue policies based on centuries of tradition. Traditions can be harmful, such as foot-binding, Judge Posner wrote, or innocuous, such as handshaking. But if a tradition is “written into law and it discriminates against a number of people and does them harm,” he wrote, “it is not just a harmless anachronism; it is a violation of the equal protection clause.”

To the states’ arguments that the issue should be left to democratic majorities in each state, the court responded: “Minorities trampled on by the democratic process have recourse to the courts; the recourse is called constitutional law.”

Wisconsin and Indiana officials immediately said they would appeal Thursday’s decision to the Supreme Court.

Until this week, about 20 federal courts in a row had ruled that state bans on same-sex marriage, or on recognition of marriages performed in other states, were unconstitutional, trampling on equal protection and due process. On Wednesday, breaking the string, a United States District Court in Louisiana upheld that state’s restrictive law, holding that states have the right to decide the issue for themselves. Most legal experts think that the Supreme Court will decide the issue for the entire country within the next year or two.