INDONESIA; Report Tracks Terror Trail of an Islamic GroupTHREATS AND RESPONSES: INDONESIA; Report Tracks Terror Trail of an Islamic Group

The 30-page report was prepared by the International Crisis Group, a private multinational organization based in Brussels. It describes how Jemaah Islamiyah began with a goal of creating an Islamic state across Southeast Asia and grew into a terrorist organization, recruiting members through family loyalties and ties formed in religious schools.

The Indonesian authorities have arrested several suspects in the bombing of the Bali nightclubs in October. The authorities have said the arrests have implicated Jemaah Islamiyah, identified as a terrorist group by the United States.

The organization, Jemaah Islamiyah, which has links to Al Qaeda, bombed the churches as revenge for the killings of Muslims by Christians during communal conflict in the Maluku Islands and Central Sulawesi in 1999 and 2000. Later, the group turned its sights on the United States, the report said.

The terrorist attack on the nightclub in Bali that killed nearly 200 people in October was the work of a radical Islamic organization that carried out a series of bombings of churches across Indonesia two years ago, according to a comprehensive report released yesterday.

Jemaaah Islamiyah's potential for further attacks ''may be more extensive than previously thought,'' said the report, which was written by Sydney Jones, an American widely regarded as the foremost authority on Jemaah Islamiyah. She is the head of the Jakarta office of the International Crisis Group.

Jemaah Islamiyah operates through cells, but it is loosely organized and has an ad hoc structure, Ms. Jones wrote. Below two tiers of leaders are the young men who carry out the attacks, driving the cars and delivering the bombs. They are often not selected until shortly before the attack, the report said.

The best-known international figure in Jemaah Islamiyah, and its formal leader is Abu Bakar Bashir, a 64-year old Indonesian cleric. Under pressure from the United States, Mr. Bashir, an unabashed admirer of the Taliban and Osama bin Laden, was arrested by the Indonesian authorities in October.

The report said the focus on Mr. Bashir might be misleading. While he knows more than he has divulged to the authorities, the report said, ''he is unlikely to have been the mastermind'' of the attacks.

Mr. Bashir envisioned establishing an Islamic state in much of Southeast Asia but the report said he had been pushed aside in recent years by more radical members.

''They saw Bashir as too weak, too accommodating, and too easily influenced by others,'' Ms. Jones wrote, based on interviews with members of Jemaah Islamiyah.

After a senior Qaeda operative in Southeast Asia, Omar al-Faruq, was seized in Indonesia he began describing what he knew about terrorist activities to his C.I.A. interrogators. Mr. Bashir then argued that bombings and the armed struggle for an Islamic state should be put on hold because the timing was wrong.