3 Suspected French Jihadists Give Up After Botched Arrest ...PARIS — Three Frenchmen suspected of having joined militants in Syria were expecting to be arrested by the French police after Turkish officials put them on a flight home on Tuesday. Instead, after their plane landed in the southern city of Marseille, they walked free while French intelligence officers waited at the wrong airport, hundreds of miles away.

After finding one police station empty, the men eventually turned themselves in on Wednesday. But not before politicians, the news media, the prime minister and the defense minister assailed a national security “foul-up” that laid bare Europe’s struggle to deal with an estimated 3,000 citizens — about 930 from France — who have left to join the ranks of jihadist groups in Syria, often using Turkey as a transit point.

For France, the bungled security operation was particularly embarrassing. It is so fearful of French jihadists returning from Syria that last week the National Assembly approved legislation to prevent them from leaving France.

The country has been on special alert since last week, when it launched airstrikes against Islamic State militants in Iraq and the group ordered its followers to attack French citizens. On Wednesday, a Qaeda offshoot in Algeria said it had beheaded a French hostage in retaliation for France’s participation in the raids.

Making matters worse, all three men at the center of the mix-up this week are well known to French counterterrorism officials and have long been under surveillance.

One was identified as Abdelouahab el-Baghdadi, 29, a brother-in-law of Mohammed Merah, who killed seven people, including three Jewish children, in Toulouse and Montauban in 2012. The others are Imad Jjebali, a childhood friend of Mr. Merah who was sentenced to four years in prison in 2009 on terrorism charges, and Gael Maurize, who was suspected by the French intelligence services of having links to a jihadi terrorist cell.

The three had turned themselves in to the police in Turkey after leaving Syria and, after several weeks in detention, were to be flown Tuesday from Istanbul to Orly Airport, near Paris, according to Christian Etelin, who has acted as a lawyer for one of the men. After the pilot refused to take the men on his plane because they did not have the necessary documents for their expulsion, the Turkish authorities instead put them on a flight to Marseille.

As French intelligence officers waited to arrest the men at Orly, the three passed unimpeded through passport control at the Marseille airport, before renting a car and driving away.

Even as the men were at large, French television, citing the Interior Ministry, announced on Tuesday that they had been arrested on the tarmac at Orly and were being questioned by the police. Officials were later forced to recant.

Jean-Yves Le Drian, the defense minister, acknowledged on France Info radio on Wednesday that the software that customs officials use to check for blacklisted passports was not working at the airport in Marseille. But he laid blame for the episode on Turkey, which, the Defense Ministry said, had notified the French authorities of the change of airports only after the three men had landed in France.

The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs declined to comment on Wednesday, saying that it was still investigating.

Mr. Etelin, who was Mr. Baghdadi’s lawyer until Wednesday, said the security failure was all the more remarkable since the three suspects had offered to turn themselves in to the French authorities. He said by telephone that the three men were astonished when they arrived in Marseille to find no officers waiting for them.

He said they rented a car, drove toward Toulouse and tried to turn themselves in at a village police station, but the police were away on rounds. “Everything in this story is absurd,” Mr. Etelin said. They eventually surrendered to the police in Le Caylar, a village northwest of Montpellier.

Mr. Etelin said the men left for Syria this year to join the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, but were shocked by its brutality and decided to flee Syria for Turkey in July. They were captured by ISIS and jailed on suspicion of being French spies, he said, but later escaped, walking about 19 miles to the Turkish border, where they turned themselves over to border guards. It was not possible to verify Mr. Etelin’s account.

“Like many who go to fight in Syria for jihad, they had fantasies of a Shariah state,” he said. “But they saw horrible things that repulsed them.”

At a time of heightened alarm about terrorism in France, the episode has generated both embarrassment and soul-searching, and prompted calls for better coordination with Turkey.

The events “have humiliated us and made us a laughingstock in front of the entire world, and this government is a government of incompetents,” Christian Estrosi, the mayor of Nice and a member of the National Assembly in the opposition Union for a Popular Movement party, told LCI television. “How can it be that we send planes to Iraq and do not properly control our borders?”