Iran Offers an Islamic Way to Improve the Lot of Women - New York ...Iran Offers an Islamic Way to Improve the Lot of Women

The Government still warns against the return to near-Western freedoms that women here experienced before the Islamic state took over in 1979.

Iranian women are still subject to fines, and sometimes flogging, for violating the Islamic dress code, or hijab, and Islamic law denies equality between sexes.

The rally, celebrating Women's Week in Iran, was a sign that some restrictions on women during the past 15 years of fundamentalist rule are starting to ease.

In a Teheran stadium last month, thousands of Iranian women marched to show their support for women's rights. But this was no protest rally. President Hashemi Rafsanjani was there, and he told the crowd of 80,000 that any effort to deny women their rights was "doomed to failure."

But it has introduced a series of reforms. In the last three years, a dormant family-planning program has been restarted. State-proposed prenuptial contracts give women the right to initiate divorce proceedings. Restrictions have been lifted on higher education to prepare women to work as engineers and assistants to judges.

The numbers of women in the workplace and in institutions of higher education have increased. Thirty percent of Government employees are women, as are 40 percent of university students, up from about 12 percent in 1978.

Faezeh Hashemi, the President's eldest daughter, has become the movement's chief spokeswoman. She said in a recent interview that she considers Islam liberating, adding that such restrictions as wearing traditional clothing need not impede a woman's career.

The 31-year-old former volleyball coach organized the first Islamic Women's Olympics in Teheran in 1993. The event, which was closed to men and photographers, attracted 700 athletes from 11 countries.

"Our goal was to give women a sense of self-confidence," Ms. Hashemi said. "In most of the Islamic world, women have cultural problems. They are regarded as a commodity, often forced into domesticity. For Iranian women, the values have changed."

But the athletic competition drew criticism from Iranian secularists who likened its seclusion to a harem and from fundamentalists who warned against perpetrating "obscene Western values."

The celebrations for Women's Week included exhibitions by female artists, award ceremonies for female factory workers and amnesty for 190 women prisoners. The state also paid for 5,000 weddings.

"The women's movement in Western societies has been led astray because of temptation and the lack of fundamental teachings," Mr. Rafsanjani told the crowd in Azadi Stadium. "Islam and the Revolution have envisioned far greater opportunities for women. To accomplish those goals we need more time."

The country's younger generation of officials, more open to the West, say the state wants to create Islamic programs that will be viewed as better than other alternatives.

One Iranian official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the leadership believes "that through propaganda they can establish their version of Islamic fundamentalism as complete and comprehensive to rival Western liberalism."

A professor of history at Teheran University, Mansoureh Ettehadieh, said: "Because of the deteriorating economic situation, the state probably wants to appeal to women. One hundred years ago, no one thought that women would go to the university in Islamic covering. The hijab was the symbol of backwardness. Today women go skiing in Islamic hijab."