Congress's Inaction Could Be Legal Basis for Stronger Executive ...WASHINGTON — As lawmakers grapple with President Obama’s claim that he already has congressional authorization for airstrikes against the Islamic State, legal specialists are saying that even legislative inaction could create a precedent leaving the executive branch with greater war-making powers.

Last week, the Obama administration asserted that a military campaign in Syria and Iraq against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, is covered by the existing 2001 authorization to use force against Al Qaeda and the 2002 approval of the Iraq War. But he said he needed new legislative authority for the related mission of providing military training for moderate rebels in Syria.

The House and Senate swiftly passed a rebel-training bill, but it did not address the executive branch’s claim about the 2001 and 2002 authorizations. Members of Congress have also introduced a flurry of bills that would explicitly authorize force against the Islamic State, but none repudiate the administration’s interpretation of existing laws, either.

The Obama legal team’s broad interpretation of the old authorizations has drawn criticism. But several legal specialists said that because Congress was on notice about how the executive branch was interpreting its 2001 and 2002 statutes, any failure to challenge that theory — especially as it enacted other legislation in connection with Islamic State policy — could be interpreted as ratifying it.

“The Supreme Court has said that sometimes, congressional silence means Congress has approved of what the executive has done,” said Barry Friedman, a New York University law professor. “If Congress, for political reasons, is unwilling or unable to speak up and the executive goes forward with its somewhat questionable theory, in the future, courts may well treat Congress’s silence as granting permission.”

In a 1981 case, Dames & Moore v. Regan, the Supreme Court ruled that Congress had consented to a presidential power to suspend private lawsuits against Iran in order to resolve the hostage crisis. Even though no statute explicitly granted that power, the court held that because Congress knew the executive branch had claimed such authority and did not challenge it, it had acquiesced to its existence.

A similar issue arose concerning the National Security Agency’s program that collects American’s phone records in bulk, which is based on an expansive and disputed interpretation of a provision in the Patriot Act. In December, a Federal District Court judge upheld the program in part because lawmakers knew or at least could have known how the provision was secretly being interpreted, and Congress nevertheless reauthorized the Patriot Act without changes.

It is far from clear that anyone would have legal standing to bring before a court a dispute regarding Mr. Obama’s authority to wage war. Questions about the scope of the 2001 law have come up in court challenges by detainees from the Afghanistan war, but airstrikes do not involve prisoners, and the administration is not planning to resume American wartime detention operations in Iraq.

Still, the Obama administration’s broad claims, and the fact that “Congress has done nothing to push back,” may become a precedent that the executive branch could use for future interpretations of statutory authorizations to use military force, said Jack Goldsmith, a Harvard Law School professor and former Justice Department official.

A related issue runs through various bills introduced by members of Congress that would provide explicit authority to fight the Islamic State. There appears to be little political appetite among congressional leaders to vote on the issue before the midterm elections in November, but several congressional staff members said such a bill may be taken up in the lame-duck session at the end of the year.

Several Republican bills would provide sweeping authority for air and ground warfare, including open-ended legislation introduced by Republican lawmakers like Representative Frank Wolf of Virginia and Senator James Inhofe of Oklahoma. An otherwise similar bill by Representative Darrell Issa, Republican of California, would expire after 120 days.

Several Democrats have introduced bills to permit a more limited air war, including Senator Bill Nelson, of Florida, whose law would expire after three years; Representative Adam Schiff of California, 18 months; and Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, one year. Those bills explicitly say they do not include authority for any major use of ground troops, and the last two restrict the geographical scope of authorizing fighting to Iraq and Syria.

But Mr. Goldsmith wrote in a blog post that such limits are “entirely ineffective” because they would not prevent the executive branch from evading them by citing the 2001 law as separate authority.

In an interview, Mr. Schiff questioned the legitimacy of relying on the old Al Qaeda law to get around the limits of a new one that focuses on the Islamic State, but said his bill could easily be adjusted to foreclose that.

He also said that after the election, Congress should repeal the 2001 and 2002 authorizations and enact a new law that sets out the scope and limits of authority to go after Al Qaeda and the Islamic State.