Egyptian Group Patiently Pursues Dream of Islamic State - New York ...The mood abruptly sours when a truck growls down the street, its back brimming with police officers brandishing long, menacing sticks. A dozen vendors besiege the 45-year-old doctor, begging him to preserve the space they need to sell their goods and to prevent big shops from gaining an edge through kickbacks. The doctor negotiates a quick compromise before rushing off to visit a school.

The group's grass-roots appeal is evident as Dr. Hishmet strolls along the market street of this provincial capital in the Nile Delta, ignoring the mud oozing over his shoes and the stench from overflowing sewers. ''Peace be upon you,'' many merchants call out, remarking that he remains the only politician they see apart from Election Day.

In the push to rid the world of Osama bin Laden and his ilk, the role of men like Dr. Hishmet and the Brotherhood, the forebear of all Islamic groups, remains uncertain.

Infectious disease specialist, university professor, member of Parliament, Dr. Gamal Hishmet is the modern face of Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood, a popular movement that has resisted every attempt to crush it during its 70-year existence.

The government of President Hosni Mubarak, never one to look favorably on competitive elections, recognizes the Brotherhood as its only serious rival and has never considered it benign. In November, 22 members who had been arrested since Sept. 11 went on trial in a military court on charges of sedition and recruiting people to an illegal organization.

Yet the group thrives largely as a result of the appeal of men like Dr. Hishmet. He is one of 17 Muslim Brotherhood members of Parliament -- all elected as independents to get around the formal ban on their movement.

Supporters say the best antidote to Muslim extremists would be to legalize the Brotherhood, giving a voice to those who want to see Egypt become a moderate Islamic state. But the Muslim Brothers have never overcome suspicions about whether they have truly jettisoned violence or whether their one-size-fits-all slogan, ''Islam Is the Solution,'' masks a link to the dark side of Islamic politics.

Hassan al-Banna, the schoolteacher who founded the group in 1928, articulated the dream of resurrecting the golden age of Muslim empire. ''It is the nature of Islam to dominate,'' he said, ''not to be dominated, to impose its law on all nations and to extend its power to the entire planet.'' That vision has inspired nearly every Muslim group formed since.

''All fundamentalist groups have one goal: setting up an Islamic state with no borders,'' said Muhammad Salah, a journalist who writes about Islamic movements in Egypt.

He believes that the Brothers are content to bide their time. ''They are not in a hurry,'' he said. ''They believe they can achieve their goal in 50 or 60 years when the whole society becomes Brothers and they will end up running the country. But the Muslim Brothers are haunted by their history.'' In another blueprint for later groups, Mr. Banna established a secret paramilitary wing that carried out violent attacks against the British, the monarchy and President Gamal Abdel Nasser. Nasser accused the group of trying to assassinate him, executed its top men and jailed members by the thousands.

The abject conditions of their imprisonment inspired a new brand of Islamic militancy articulated by one, Sayyid Qutb. His 1964 screed that unjust rulers could be considered infidels and hence eliminated galvanized succeeding generations of Islamic radicals. Mr. bin Laden applied the creed to his own rulers in Saudi Arabia, branding the royal family infidels for allowing American troops to be stationed in the land of Islam's most holy sites, Mecca and Medina.

The Brotherhood says it has changed its ways.

''For 35 years no one from the Brothers has been accused of committing, inciting or even approving of violence,'' said Mamoun al-Hodhaibi, a retired judge jailed from 1965 to 1971 for his membership.

''Most Islamic groups, the extremist groups that appeared here, all came from the same womb,'' said Nabil Osman, head of the State Information Service. ''They can claim that they are not shooting now, but instead of bullets they are shooting concepts of extremism and deception.'' While banned since 1954, the Brotherhood remains significant because the effort to either dilute or co-opt its appeal permanently altered the face of Egypt. Nasser introduced an all-Koran radio station and religious instruction, creating classroom segregation for the first time between Muslims and the Coptic Christian minority.

President Anwar el-Sadat changed the Constitution to say that Islamic law is the most important inspiration for Egypt's laws. By 1971 Sadat released thousands of Muslim Brothers, using them to undermine opponents of his opening Egypt to Western markets and influence. Islamic militants gunned him down after he made peace with Israel.

The Muslim Brotherhood openly espouses violence in the Arab-Israeli conflict. At the entrance to the Alexandria clubhouse of the Doctors' Syndicate, an organization controlled by the Brotherhood, an Islamic bookseller maintains a small kiosk. The rack for children's books includes a pop-up history of the Palestinian fight against occupation. The pop-up figures include an Israeli soldier being stabbed to death, blood squirting across his uniform.