Islamic Guerrillas in Algeria Gain Against Military Rulers - New York ...Hundreds, perhaps as many as 8,000 young men, have deserted from the army this year, diplomats say. And many have taken their weapons with them to the mountainous interior where Islamic militants are forming a formidable guerrilla army. Responding to the killing of Algerian officials and members of the security forces, paramilitary death squads have in recent months killed dozens of suspected militants, say Western diplomats and human rights officials. [ Page A6. ]

Thousands of foreign workers and diplomats, 26 of whom have been shot dead in the last four months, have fled Algeria. Police officers and troops withdraw at dusk from many villages and slums where the militants enjoy wide support, and the nightly curfew is punctuated with the sound of gunfire.

Many of the army generals who rule the country, along with their supporters, have retreated to tightly guarded seaside compounds outside Algiers, frequently using helicopters to travel to and from offices and meetings.

The armed Islamic insurgency that has been fighting for two years is swiftly gaining ground against a military-backed Government whose authority seems to be deteriorating daily.

Foreign embassies, including the American Embassy, have reduced their staffs, warned their citizens to leave and relocated remaining diplomats to secure compounds. One Western embassy requires bulletproof vests for its diplomats, who like all foreigners in Algeria have been threatened with death by the militants if a deadline of Nov. 30 for leaving was not met.

"The biggest risk now is a convergence of the social and political problems," a European diplomat said. "If there is unrest on the streets because of the growing food shortages the troops may not want to shoot. At that point things would unravel. I could then see an alliance between junior officers and Islamic leaders that would lead to an Islamic state."

Algeria, a former French colony that had been governed by National Liberation Front since independence in 1962, felt the political power of Muslim militancy in 1991 when the Islamic Salvation Front soundly defeated the governing party in the first round of Parliamentary elections. Rather than allow the Islamic party to form a government, the military removed President Chadli Benjedid in January 1992 and canceled elections that would have given the Islamic Front control of Parliament.

The generals later named a five-man committee to rule the country. Although a national conference to choose a new president is scheduled this month, it is widely seen as window-dressing for continued military rule. Fear of Exodus to France

The creation of an Islamic state in Algeria could force 500,000 Algerians to flee to France, European diplomats said. With Islamic fundamentalists in control in the Sudan and with Egypt facing a violent campaign by militants, a Muslim takeover could further destabilize neighboring North African nations like Tunisia and Morocco.

Islamic groups, after being outlawed in 1992, began an armed insurrection, ambushing police and Government officials. In the last two years, the campaign has killed 2,000 people, including many intellectuals and writers who opposed the Islamic movement. But Islamic leaders say they have lost control of the insurrection as new groups, like the Islamic Armed Movement and the Armed Islamic Group, have emerged to supplant the traditional leadership of the Islamic Front.

"The best organization is no organization," the senior leader said. "You now get five or six kids with a few guns who want to help the revolution. Even we don't often know who they are." Dialogue With Rebels

The only tactic that might salvage some form of the widely unpopular military-run Government is a dialogue between the generals and the outlawed Islamic Salvation Front, say many critics of the Government. But with the generals and the militants showing little willingness to compromise, the two sides appear locked in a deadly contest that is plunging the country of 26 million into anarchy.

Islamic militants, who often own the streets after dusk, have already carved out small enclaves. In the militant stronghold of Blida, 30 miles south of Algiers, the militants run whole neighborhoods and battle the police.

After burning down establishments that sell alcohol and assassinating at least one bar owner, militants have dried up Blida, a city of 400,000 people. Beauty parlors, anathema to the fundamentalists, have been ransacked. Most of the women on the street are veiled. Several have closed and the two that remain now operate behind locked doors. Stores that sell music cassettes no longer carry recordings by Western groups or female singers. Satellite dishes, which bring in foreign broadcasts, have been dismantled. And kiosks and shops stopped selling newspapers a week ago.

Fear drives most Algerians home before dark, where they sit trapped in tiny, overcrowded apartments watching the censored Government-run television network or French channels.

"We voted for the Islamists and we abide by what they demand,"Mohammed Abdel Majid, a 35-year-old unemployed librarian said, alluding the elections that were canceled. "The Government closed down the Islamic newspapers two years ago. If we can't get the Islamic papers, why should we get the Government papers?"