With Freedom, Cairo Intellectuals Find New Stress; Pressures ...With Freedom, Cairo Intellectuals Find New Stress; Pressures Squeeze Islamic Scholars As Well as Leftists and Liberals

Despite economic reforms, Egypt's continuing poverty, too, has taken a toll. University professors now earn less than servants, about $300 a month. Whereas at the dawn of independence, in the 1920's, thousands of books were published in Cairo, along with 200 newspapers and journals, 60 of them in foreign languages, only 375 books were published last year in a country of 63 million people. Mohammed Sid Ahmed, a leading leftist thinker, said intellectuals now read Al Ahram, once Egypt's most important newspaper, ''mainly to see who died.''

Under President Hosni Mubarak, privatization and globalization have spurred economic growth and opened up Egyptian society. But with that, intellectuals have a less prominent role, Mr. Bashir said. What he calls the bureaucracy's ''Mameluk mentality,'' referring to the military oligarchs who ruled between the 13th and 16th centuries, and Egypt's corrupt ''moneyed culture'' impede modern intellectual as well as economic development.

''There is a vast amount of commotion and ferment amid utter stagnation,'' said Tahseen Bashir, a scholar and former diplomat. ''Arab leftist thought has reached a cul-de-sac and so has that of the Islamists. There is now a deep void in Egyptian intellectual life,'' and because of Egypt's central role in Arab political and cultural life, he says, ''a vacuum in intellectual life throughout the Arab world.''

For Arab intellectuals here, this is a time of opportunity, danger and above all, change. While many say that never have they known such freedom of thought as in Egypt today, they also complain that threats from militant Islamists as well as official, collegial and economic pressures have silenced independent voices and weakened what was once the Arabs' most luminous intelligentsia.

Egyptian Islamists, too, have found themselves shipwrecked. Once courted by the Government or used to counter leftist critics, Islamists are now increasingly on the defensive. ''The Islamists themselves are split over such key issues as the use of violence, how an Islamic state should be governed and the treatment of women,'' Mr. Bashir said. The massacre of more than 60 Western tourists in December at Luxor by young Islamists, some of whom turned out to be middle-class university students, shocked peaceable Egyptians who abhor brutality and worsened an existing split in the militants' ranks.

Many Egyptian-based members of the Gamaa Islamiya, or the Islamic Group, intensified their call for a truce with President Mubarak, while adherents abroad rejected compromise. (From his American prison cell where he is serving a life sentence for his role in the World Trade Center bombing plots, Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman, the Islamic Group's spiritual leader, endorsed a cease-fire.)

The massacre, or ''accident,'' as it is often called, also drove intellectuals more firmly into the Government's fold.

''It was a dreadful tactical error'' for the Islamists, said Lutfi Kholi, a prominent leftist thinker, ''in that it united the masses and intellectuals with a state that has occasionally oppressed them both.''

As Mr. Bashir sees it, the current intellectual void, or ''suspended animation,'' reflects the exhaustion of two intellectual trends that have competed throughout much of Egypt's modern history: liberal thinkers represented by the late Taha Hussein, the Arabs' most articulate champion of a modern secular future, who argued in the mid-1920's that Eygpt, the world's oldest nation-state, was an integral part of Mediterranean culture, or the West, and those who followed Hassan al-Banna, the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood, established in Egypt in 1928 and today the world's largest Islamist network.

Banna's Muslim Brotherhood sought political salvation not through the West, whose institutions and laws Egypt's 19th-century ruler Mohammed Ali had imported to Egyptian society, but through a return to the laws and precepts of Islam.

For Islamists, as they later came to be called, Arab greatness could be reclaimed only through a return to and revival of Islam and its caliphate, whose rulers presided over the medieval world's most vibrant empires and innovative cultures.

After Gamal Abdel Nasser's 1952 military coup, the Islamists were crushed and the liberals withered. Arab nationalism and socialism became much of the Arab world's secular religion. Leftists had their heyday under Nasser, the embodiment of pan-Arabism, who gave intellectuals a designated role as the explainers of the new faith.

But the 1967 military defeat by Israel, Anwar el-Sadat's lonely peace with the Jews and finally, the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran all weakened the left. ''The death knell,'' Mr. Bashir said, ''was the Soviet Union's collapse and the 1991 gulf war, which pitted Egypt, pan-Arabism's standard-bearer, against fellow Arab nationalist Iraq.''

After Nasser, Sadat, who had once been editor of Al Ahram, had little use for the men of letters, especially those who opposed him. There was no room for them in Sadat's Infitah, or economic liberalization. Intellectuals, proselytizers of the discredited pan-Arab nationalist faith, no longer had a function. Said Mr. Bashir, ''The government no longer provides intellectual dynamism and sense of mission as Nasser did.''