Militants in Benghazi Attack Tied to a Qaeda Affiliate - NYTimes.comCAIRO — The Libyan militant group accused of leading the attack on the United States diplomatic mission in Benghazi two years ago had previously helped train a dozen fighters who went on to participate in a deadly attack on an Algerian gas plant, according to a United Nations Security Council document justifying new sanctions on the group, Ansar al-Shariah.

Later, in the year after the Benghazi attack, Ansar al-Shariah of Benghazi “also provided training and logistical support” to Al Qaeda’s North African affiliate, Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, the document states, and the Qaeda group in turn helped Ansar al-Shariah orchestrate suicide bombings at the end of 2013 and the following summer.

Witnesses in Benghazi as well as United States officials say that Ansar al-Shariah fighters played a major role in the assault on the American diplomatic mission in Benghazi on Sept. 11, 2012, killing Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans.

The extent of the group’s links to Al Qaeda, though, have been a subject of fierce debate in Washington, where Republican critics have accused the Obama administration of trying to cover up a Qaeda role in the attack.

The New York Times reported in December 2013 that Libyan witnesses said the attack was led primarily by Ahmed Abu Khattala, an eccentric extremist with no known ties to international terrorist groups, and that he was joined by fighters from Ansar al-Shariah, as well as others. American commandos captured Mr. Abu Khattala in a raid on Benghazi earlier this year, and federal prosecutors in Washington have charged him with murder in connection with the attack.

The Security Council document does not connect Al Qaeda itself or its affiliates to that attack. But on Wednesday, the Security Council for the first time included Ansar al-Shariah of Benghazi in a program of sanctions targeting groups and individuals who support Al Qaeda or are derived from it. The document cites not only public statements by Ansar al-Shariah’s leader in support of Al Qaeda’s ideology in 2012, but also collaboration with Al Qaeda’s North African affiliate, Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, in the years since the attack.

Western diplomats involved in the move to place sanctions on the group said the decision was motivated by a desire to address current events in Libya rather than by new information about the past. In recent months, the militants of Ansar al-Shariah have been welcomed as allies by a broader coalition of more moderate Islamists and regional militias fighting for power across Libya. That coalition’s opponents are a rival assembly of tribal groups, former members of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s armed forces, and the leaders of the recently elected Parliament.

The United Nations and Western diplomats are trying to negotiate a truce or reconciliation between the two sides, and the diplomats involved said the sanctions were intended to try to isolate Ansar al-Shariah from the larger coalition, known as Libya Dawn. The sanctions may also enable the Security Council to try to penalize individuals involved in or backing Ansar al-Shariah.

Between 2011 and 2014, Ansar al-Shariah of Benghazi “has conducted many terrorist attacks and assassinations, targeting local security forces in Benghazi, and is responsible for hundreds of victims,” the Security Council document notes. British, French and American diplomats led the push for the sanctions.

Founded in February 2012, Ansar al-Shariah has controlled “terrorist training camps,” mainly for fighters who went on to join “Al Qaeda associated groups operating in Syria and Iraq and, to a lesser extent, in Mali.”

In the summer of 2012 — shortly before the attack on the American mission — a dozen fighters trained in Ansar al-Shariah camps and went on to participate in a militant attack on a gas facility at Amenas, Algeria, in January 2013. At least 40 workers were killed, and 29 militants died in fighting with Algerian security forces. Mokhtar bel Mokhtar, a renegade Algerian militant who broke away from Al Qaeda’s North African affiliate, claimed responsibility.

After Ansar al-Shariah’s “training and logistical support” to Al Qaeda’s North African affiliate the next summer — after the mission attack — the document states that the Benghazi group was “also believed to have been involved in the first suicide bombings targeting the Libyan security forces,” on Dec. 22, 2013, and on July 22, 2014. Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb “supported these attacks,” the document states, again without elaborating.

The Security Council also applied the sanctions to a separate but allied group of the same name, Ansar al-Shariah of Derna, Libya. (The name means Supporters of Islamic Law.) Its leader, Sufian bin Qumu, is a former prisoner at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, and a former associate of Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan. United States officials have said they believe at least some of that group’s fighters also participated in the Benghazi mission attack.

The document states that in October, Ansar al-Shariah of Derna pledged its allegiance to the extremist group in Syria and Iraq that calls itself the Islamic State.