Wary Tribal Alliances, Born of Necessity, Offer Hope in Iraq ...BAGHDAD — After enduring weeks of abuse by insurgents of the group called Islamic State, members of the Aza tribe struck a secret deal last month with local police and military officials: The authorities would supply weapons to two tribal regiments totaling about 1,150 fighters, and in return the tribe would help government security forces fight the Islamic State.

Several days later, the tribal regiments, in collaboration with Iraqi government troops and Shiite militia fighters, liberated 13 villages in Diyala Province from the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS, officials said.

“ISIS has humiliated the top sheikhs of Diyala and has done horrible and unforgivable crimes against people here,” said Abu Othman al-Azawi, an Aza sheikh and a member of the provincial council. “They tried to vandalize the tribal system and break its ties.”

Despite the support of United States-led airstrikes, anti-Islamic State forces have had little success driving the insurgents from territory they seized in Iraq and Syria. On Friday, after weathering days of aerial bombardments, Islamic State fighters pushed into the Syrian Kurdish town of Kobani on the Syria-Turkey border.

In Iraq, a cornerstone of the government’s military strategy is a long-term plan to integrate Sunni tribal fighters into national guard units in the Sunni-dominated provinces where the Islamic State has made its greatest gains. That idea, however, remains inchoate.

But the successful deal with the Aza tribe — arranged by a brigadier general without Baghdad’s input — offers an early glimmer of hope for long-term cooperation between the Shiite-led security forces and Sunni tribes.

Around the country, government forces and some Sunni tribal leaders are brokering emergency marriages of convenience, resulting in a patchwork of alliances against Islamic State.

In most of the significant clashes in the past week, for example, tribal fighters participated alongside government forces, representing the kind of cooperation that the Iraqi government and its American partners say could help tip the balance in the fight. In Dhuluiya, 50 miles north of Baghdad, members of the Jubouri tribe working with Iraqi security forces and a Shiite militia have been fighting ISIS in a seesaw battle for several days.

Some of the arrangements involve the arming of tribes and even cash payments by the government. Others are nothing more than an understanding that despite whatever animosity a Sunni tribe might feel toward the central government, its weapons will be trained on their common enemy, the Islamic State, not on each other — at least for now.

Wasfi al-Aasi, an Obeidi tribal sheikh and head of a council of tribes opposed to the Islamic State, said in an interview on Monday that most tribes fighting alongside the government were doing so out of necessity, but not with contracts or guarantees.

“The Iraqi government and the coalition should arm us and support us because it’s us who are on the ground,” he said. “They know this very well because they need our power on the ground.”

The government’s tribal outreach this year has been scattershot and has lacked a coherent strategy, Sunni sheikhs said. (Top Iraqi military and security officials did not reply to repeated phone calls and messages seeking comment about their efforts to engage the Sunni tribes.)

In January, after the Islamic State pushed into Anbar Province, in western Iraq, the administration of Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, then the prime minister, reached out to several tribes, and provided them with weapons and ammunition, said Athal al-Fahdawi, a provincial council member from Ramadi, the provincial capital.

But since then, he said, the support for most of these groups has dried up.

“That’s why most of the areas in Anbar Province have fallen under ISIS’ control: because of the weak and limited support from the government,” Mr. Fahdawi said. “The government just did not commit, and they did not provide us with what we needed.”

Speaking to reporters in Baghdad on Friday, retired Gen. John R. Allen, President Obama’s special envoy to the global coalition fighting the Islamic State, suggested that the Iraqi government’s outreach to the tribes was evolving.

“The Iraqis are taking stock — across the board — of the effectiveness of the Iraqi security forces on the ground, how they can marry up with the tribes and how they can create opportunities for cooperation and combination,” he said. “There is an intention for active tribal engagement.”

But the general pointed out that the task was complicated. “There is no cookie-cutter approach to the tribes,” he said. “Each one has to be taken separately.”

Indeed, the geometry of tribes and tribal loyalties in Iraq is byzantine. Allegiances — even within tribes — can vary from province to province, district to district, village to village.

Iraqi officials have also been concerned that arming Sunni tribes could enable the formation of paramilitary organizations that could turn quickly against the Shiite-led government.

Still, the Islamic State’s immense threat has prompted ad hoc relationships throughout the Sunni regions of the country.

On Thursday, El Bayaa tribal fighters joined Iraqi government forces and Kurdish pesh merga troops to liberate four villages in the Tuz district of Salahuddin Province.

Members of the Albo Nimr tribe in Hit, in Anbar Province, joined government security forces in an unsuccessful defense of the city, which fell to the insurgents late last week after several days of fighting.

Members of the Jaghaifa tribe in Anbar Province, armed by the government, have been helping to hold the critical Haditha Dam, said Mr. Aasi, the Obeidi sheikh. In Ramadi, Albu Fahad fighters had been working with Iraqi forces against the Islamic State, he said, while an array of other groups — Albu Alwan, Albu Fayad, Albu Esa, Albu Shaban and Albu Khalifa — were coordinating with government forces elsewhere in Anbar.

Faisal al-Esawi, a leader of the Albu Esa tribe in the Amiriyat Al-Falluja district near Ramadi, said that his tribe was aligned with government forces for the time being, though they had only “limited cooperation” with the government. “We realize the threat of Islamic State,” he said.

But in its effort to fully win over the Sunni tribes, the Shiite-led central government must overcome sectarian mistrust that hardened during the administration of Mr. Maliki.

In Tikrit, the Jubouri tribe is fighting against the Islamic State, but still harbors deep suspicions about the government’s agenda.

“It is simple: We do not trust the government,” said Abu Abir al-Jubouri, one of the Jubouri tribal sheikhs in Tikrit. He said his tribe viewed ISIS as a more immediate adversary. But tribe members were concerned that in the event of an Islamic State defeat, Shiite militias would sweep into Salahuddin Province and execute Sunnis on suspicion of having aided the insurgents.

“It is a critical situation,” Mr. Jubouri said. “We do not want ISIS to stay. But we just do not trust who follows.”

The Aza sheikhs who brokered their partnership with the government in Diyala said that despite their mistrust in the government, the deal was their best chance to free themselves from Islamic State control.

It is a measure of how bad their situation had become, said Mr. Azawi, the Aza sheikh. “We are ready to shake hands with the devil,” he said.