ISIS Chief Emerges, Urging 'Volcanoes of Jihad' - NYTimes.comBAGHDAD — Dispelling rumors of his injury or death, the leader of the militant group that calls itself the Islamic State issued a new call to arms on Thursday in a 17-minute speech, belittling President Obama’s plan to send more soldiers to Iraq and urging disciples to “erupt volcanoes of jihad everywhere.”

An audio recording of the speech by the leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, was distributed online, along with Arabic, English and Russian transcripts. It was first reported by the SITE Intelligence Group, a jihadist monitoring organization.

Mr. Baghdadi’s speech appeared to end days of rumors that he had been killed or grievously wounded in an airstrike carried out in northwestern Iraq on Saturday by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State.

It was not clear precisely when the recording was produced. But it alluded to an event that took place on Monday, when an Egyptian militant organization pledged its loyalty to the Islamic State.

With characteristic bluster, Mr. Baghdadi exhorted Muslims throughout the Middle East to rise up against “the agents of the Jews and crusaders, their slaves, tails and dogs.” He declared, “We see America and her allies stumbling between fear, weakness, inability and failure.”

The speech was distributed on the same day that top American military officials were testifying in Congress about the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The Sunni Muslim group has seized a large area that crosses the border of Syria and Iraq. On Friday, Mr. Obama announced plans to deploy 1,500 additional soldiers to Iraq, effectively doubling the number assigned as advisers to help the Iraqi Army beat back the militants.

Mr. Baghdadi scoffed at that plan. “Here is Obama, who has ordered the deployment of 1,500 additional soldiers under the claim that they are advisers because the crusaders’ airstrikes and constant bombardment — day and night — upon the position of the Islamic State have not prevented its advance, nor weakened its resolve,” he said in the audio recording.

In a mix of anti-Semitic and other hateful language, he urged followers to prioritize violence against Shiite Muslims and, after that, the Saudi royal family. Of the group’s enemies, he said: “Dismember them. Snatch them as groups and individuals.”

Just days after the Egyptian militant group, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis, became the first significant group outside Syria or Iraq to declare its fealty to him as leader of the Islamic State, Mr. Baghdadi said he accepted its pledge of obedience as well as those of smaller groups in Yemen, Libya and Algeria.

Any Muslims in those countries should report to their local Islamic State affiliate as soon as possible, he said. “We ask every individual among them to join the closest unit to him, and to hear and obey the governor appointed by us for it,” he said, urging patience for others. “Soon — God willing — the vanguard of the Islamic State will reach you.”

He mocked news reports about the Sunni Arab states that are participating in the campaign against the Islamic State, and especially the heavy publicity about the role of a female fighter pilot from the United Arab Emirates. “The Jews and crusaders are not in need of the effeminate pilots from the soldiers of the gulf rulers, nor are they in need of their planes,” he said. “The story of their participation in the crusade is just a media farce.”

Mr. Baghdadi appeared to claim that Israel was secretly involved in the American-led campaign as well. “Due to their fear and weakness, the Jews covertly and stealthily participate in this crusade,” he said. “They do not have the courage to announce this, out of fear of the Muslims.”

He also sought to push back against the many Muslim scholars of all shades who have condemned his self-proclaimed caliphate. The Western powers, he said, had “amassed all the palace scholars and utilized all their trumpets, satellite stations and media in the largest campaign of forgery, falsification, distortion and slander against the Islamic State.”

He predicted that the Western powers would soon be forced to engage in ground combat with his fighters, who are concentrated mostly in eastern Syria and northwestern Iraq.

“O soldiers of the Islamic State, continue to harvest the soldiers,” he said. “Erupt volcanoes of jihad everywhere.”

The Islamic State also disclosed in a separate announcement reported by SITE a plan to mint and circulate its own currency, using gold, silver and copper coins. The announcement did not explain when the currency would be introduced or other important details, but that it was meant to liberate users from the “satanic usury-based global economic system.”