Sunni Militants Draw Iraqi Forces Into Intense Battles on Several ...BAGHDAD — Iraqi government forces and allied Sunni tribal fighters on Friday fought for the third straight day to fend off a heavy assault by Islamic State militants on a strategically placed town in Anbar Province, officials said.

The Anbar fighting was just one of several intense and shifting battle fronts in Iraq on Friday. Iraqi soldiers backed by coalition air support made more progress in a counteroffensive north of Baghdad near Baiji, seeking to break the militants’ stranglehold on a government-controlled oil refinery. And in the far north, on Mount Sinjar, a trapped contingent of fighters from the minority Yazidi sect struggled to hold off a sustained Islamic State siege.

The assault on the Anbar town, Amariyat al-Falluja, was the latest attempt by militants of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, to wrest control of an important road that connects insurgent strongholds in Anbar with Babel Province southwest of Baghdad. The attack, a two-pronged blitz of heavy weapons, began Wednesday and came several days after another siege was rebuffed by Iraqi Army and police troops garrisoned in the town, officials said.

“We have been resisting ISIS since the first day,” Shakir al-Essawi, the head of the local council, said in a phone interview Friday. He said the government and tribal forces would fight until “the last drop of blood.”

The Sunni jihadists of the Islamic State seized territory in Anbar at the beginning of the year, and in the past two months have scored other strategic victories in the province, which abuts greater Baghdad, heightening concerns about the security of the capital.

On Thursday, the rebels added to their gains in Anbar by overwhelming the final pocket of resistance in the town of Hit. Fighters of the Albu Nimr tribe surrendered their village after fending off the militants for weeks.

Earlier this month, the Islamic State overran Hit and took the nearby village of Kubaisa, as well as a small training garrison abandoned by retreating troops. The district straddles a main road running from Baghdad through northern Anbar Province to the Syrian border.

Military officials also reported Friday that clashes had broken out the day before near Lake Tharthar, an important source of irrigation for the region’s agriculture. The government troops were forced to retreat, ceding control of one of the lake’s water-control gates. The jihadists opened the gate for a few hours, the officials said, but it remained unclear whether it caused significant flooding.

Government officials have worried about the threat of Iraq’s crucial waterways being used as a weapon by the Islamic State. Of particular concern is the possibility of militants seizing control of major hydroelectric dams, which would give them control over the supply of water and electricity to millions of people.

Islamic State fighters launched an offensive this week apparently seeking to commandeer the Mosul Dam for the second time this year, officials said. But officials said that Iraqi and Kurdish pesh merga forces, supported by heavy coalition airstrikes, had repelled the attempt.

Yazidi leaders also redoubled their pleas Friday for more air support and reinforcements for thousands of Yazidis trapped on Mount Sinjar, in northwestern Iraq. Islamic State militants started advancing on the area on Monday, seizing two villages.

In Salahuddin Province, officials said Friday that troops waging an operation to break an Islamic State siege of the Baiji oil refinery had gained control of the western, eastern and southern sides of the city and had cut a key supply route to jihadists encircling the refinery, military officials said.

The operation, which began last week, appears to be the largest operation that the Iraqi security forces have conducted in an effort to retake territory from the Islamic State. American military officials said the operation points to a new phase in which they expect the Iraqi security forces to become more aggressive against the Islamic State, though the officials cautioned that Iraq is still months away from mounting sustained counteroffensives.

On Friday evening, the Defense Department announced that a 19-year-old Marine had died in Baghdad. The Marine, Lance Cpl. Sean P. Neal, 19, of Riverside, Calif., died Thursday “from a noncombat related incident,” which was under investigation, the Defense Department said.