Highs and lows of Jakarta's burgeoning club scene | The Jakarta PostJAKARTA (JP): In a metropolitan city like Jakarta, with overstressed workers needing a place to release all that pent-up tension, clubbing is becoming a basic need.

Inevitably, with changing trends and as young clubbers graduate to the adult league, the club scene changes over time.

While a few clubs, like Tanamur, remain strong with the regulars, most of them die a short, sharp death after their brief fling with popularity fizzles. Remember Ebony Videotheque in Kuningan and the cavernous Stardust in Kota area? Both were popular in the early to mid-1990s, both now are but a memory.

These days, there is something for everyone in the club scene. Check out the lowdown on several major venues.

Tanamur, Jl. Tanah Abang Timur No. 14, Central Jakarta. Open from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m.

Once more, for the record, this is the oldest club in town. It's a melting pot of all kinds of people. There is nothing fancy about the decoration, the music is a bit dreary nowadays (undefined techno) but it can be fun if you are with the right bunch of people. Gay people rule the upstairs section.

Whose haunt: From young to old, foreigners to locals, high class to low class, straight to gay, prostitutes (male and female). Basically, everybody and anybody.

How much: Rp 35,000 for a first drink cover charge (you get a soft drink or a glass of beer). Basic cocktails cost around Rp 30,000.

BC Bar, Sarinah Building, Jl. Thamrin, Central Jakarta. Open from 10 p.m. to 4 a.m.

So far, in the couple of years since its opening, BC Bar has established its own regular crowd and there are some theme parties every month.

Minimalist decor with 70s style lighting. If not serving drinks, the bartenders go wild by pouring alcohol on the bar and setting it alight (reminds me of a scene in Coyote Ugly) or spraying overheated guests with water or soft drinks from the tap.

Music is kind of groovy, from the latest dance music to soft techno. It can be really packed, so you feel you are almost suffocating, but it is a nice feeling.

Whose haunt: Young locals around 22 and above. Not a cruisy place at all. People who come here are craving for some good music to dance to.

How much: There is a cover charge of between Rp 25,000 and Rp 50,000 cover charge (depending on the drinks you want). A gin and tonic is Rp 30,000.

De Leila, Patra Jasa Building, Jl. Gatot Subroto, South Jakarta. Open from 7 p.m. to 4 a.m.

Live dangdut (Indonesianized Arab/Indian tunes) and Arabic music, a combination you really can't find anywhere else in town. And, if you are not into the music, the dodgy-looking waiters' outfits are quite a laugh, or you can play pool upstairs.

It's not to everyone's taste but definitely worth visiting. On certain nights they have live belly dancers. Tacky but amusing.

Whose haunt: Mostly plump Middle Eastern people plus local girls on the make and a few curious foreigners.

How much: Rp 20,000 on weekdays and Rp 25,000 at weekends. The gin and tonic is priced Rp 35,000.

Mata Bar, Wisma Metropolitan II Building, Jl. Jenderal Sudirman Kav. 31, top floor, Jakarta Selatan. Open from 11 p.m. to 3 a.m.

A pretentious place (used to be really popular) with a long queue to the elevator. The dance floor is tiny and dangerously crowded at the weekends, but the lounge is spacious and you can enjoy the spectacular view of the bright lights of Jakarta's skyscrapers. Music is a pass mixture of popular disco and mad hard house.

How much: Rp 30,000 for first drink cover charge. A vodka orange will take Rp 35,000 from your wallet.

Lava Lounge, Kompleks Taman Ria Senayan, Jl. Gerbang Pemuda No. 3, East End Building, South Jakarta. Open from 9 p.m. to 2 a.m. on weekdays and until 4 a.m. on weekends.

A club with lava lamps that never work. Full of the youngsters who go out to see and to be seen. They go mad with all the deep house and garage dominating music blasting into their ears.

Occasionally they have theme parties. Jammed on weekends, as the crowd takes in funky jazz fast beats and the latest dance music. Regular cocktails cost Rp 35,000.

Whose haunt: Young crowd, from 17 to 25.

How much: Rp 30,000 for first drink cover charge.

Stadium, Jl. Hayam Wuruk No. 111, West Jakarta. Open from 9 p.m. until midday the next day.

A famous or notorious place for clubbers, depending on your take. Very dark, with Romanesque decor, but the laser lighting is quite impressive. The beat of the music is fast and furious -- drum banging, scratching and deep house sounds.

This is the place to go when everything else has closed down. Occasionally, they have guest DJs from abroad.

How much: Rp 15,000 on weekdays and Rp 20,000 on weekends for first drink cover charge. Mineral water is the official drink here and it only costs Rp 20,000.

ML Discotheque, intersection of Jl. Hayam Wuruk and Jl. Mangga Besar, 3rd floor, West Jakarta. Open from 10 p.m. to 3 a.m. only on weekends.

Although others, such as Prego's on Thursday and Jalan Jalan on Sunday, have their ""special"" nights, this is the only exclusively gay club in town. It's tacky, smelly, cruisy, dirty and dark. The music can be hideous as they play a whole range, from remixed Whitney Houston to dangdut disco to ballroom dance music. Drag queen shows are a common part of the entertainment.

Whose haunt: Middle to low-class local gay guys, some fag hags and some desperate expatriates.

How much: Rp 15,000 for first drink cover charge. Drinks are reasonably priced but tasteless. A beer is Rp 15,000.