Gay rights advocates march on DC, divided on Obama | The Jakarta ...Thousands of gay and lesbian activists were expected to converge Sunday in a march from the White House to the Capitol, demanding that President Barack Obama keep his promises to push for civil rights protections from the federal government. 



Some participants in the National Equality March woke up energized by Obama's blunt pledge to end the ban on gays serving openly in the military during a speech to the largest U.S. gay rights advocacy group Saturday night. 



"I will end 'don't ask-don't tell,"' Obama said Saturday night to a standing ovation from the crowd of about 3,000 at the annual dinner of the Human Rights Campaign.

 

He offered no timetable or specifics on changing the so-called "don't ask, don't tell" policy, which allows gay men and women to serve as long as they keep their sexual orientation hidden, and he acknowledged some may be growing impatient. 



"I appreciate that many of you don't believe progress has come fast enough," Obama said. "Do not doubt the direction we are heading and the destination we will reach." 



Obama also called on Congress to repeal the Defense Of Marriage Act, which limits how state, local and federal bodies can recognize partnerships and determine benefits. He also called for a law to extend benefits to domestic partners. 



He expressed strong support for the HRC agenda of ending discrimination against gays, lesbians, bisexuals and transgender people but stopped short of laying out a detailed plan for how to get there. 



Obama's political energies have been focused on two wars, the economic crisis and health care reform, though he pledged "unwavering" commitment even as he wrestled with those problems. 



March organizer Cleve Jones, creator of the AIDS Memorial Quilt and a protégé of slain gay rights pioneer Harvey Milk, said Obama stopped short of explaining when he would make good on his promises. 



"He repeated his promises that he's made to us before, but he did not indicate when he would accomplish these goals and we've been waiting for a while now," said Jones.

 

The Human Rights Campaign holds out hope of seeing more action from Obama. 



"We have never had a stronger ally in the White House. Never," Joe Solmonese, the group's president, said at the dinner before the president spoke. 



On Sunday, Sen. Carl Levin of Michigan, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said he expects the ban on gays openly serving in the military to be lifted, but he said it's critical that the administration have the support of military leaders. 



A Republican on the committee, Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, agreed with Levin that support within the military is important and said such a policy decision shouldn't be based on a "campaign pledge." Both senators appeared on NBC television's "Meet the Press." 



Sunday's march was scheduled to begin at noon (1600 GMT) near the White House. Unlike the first march in 1979 and others in 1987, 1993 and 2000 that included celebrity performances and drew as many as 500,000 people, Sunday's event was driven by grassroots efforts and was expected to be more low-key. 



Many organizers were outraged after the passage of California's Proposition 8, which canceled the right of gays to get married in the state, and over perceived slights by the Obama administration. 



By Friday, 75 busloads of people had confirmed they would be traveling to Washington, said march co-director Robin McGehee. 



For Lt. Dan Choi, the day began with a jog around Washington's memorials, calling cadence at 8 a.m. with fellow veterans and supporters before joining the march. Choi, a West Point graduate, Arabic speaker and Iraq war veteran, is facing discharge under the military's "don't ask, don't tell" policy for revealing in March that he is gay. 



"We have fought in battles to protect our country, and now we are fighting at home for equal and full protection under the law," he said. 



On Saturday, he led a group of gay veterans in laying a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at Arlington National Cemetery to honor gay and lesbian soldiers who have died in the line of duty. 



The weekend also included political training at several D.C. universities for young activists to learn how to build support and lobby lawmakers at home. 



Other veteran activists doubted the march would accomplish much. They said the time and money would have been better spent working to persuade voters in Maine and Washington state to support gay rights. 



In Maine, voters will decide whether or not to uphold the state's legalization of same-sex marriage. In Washington state, a so-called "everything but marriage" law that expands the state's current domestic partnership law will be on the ballot. 



A bill legalizing same-sex marriage in the U.S. capital also was introduced last week by the District of Columbia Council and is expected to easily pass. 



Rep. Barney Frank, an openly gay member of Congress, said the marchers should be lobbying their lawmakers. He said the demonstrations are simply "an emotional release" that do little to pressure Congress. 



"The only thing they're going to be putting pressure on is the grass," the Massachusetts Democrat said Friday.