Caretaker gets 3 months for attacking Catholics in Sleman | The ...Judges at Sleman District Court in Yogyakarta sentenced pesantren (Islamic boarding school) caretaker Abdul Kholik to three months in jail on Thursday for attacking Catholics who were conducting a prayer session in May.



According to the panel of judges presided over by Marliyus, Abdul was convicted for violating Article 170 of the Criminal Law Procedures Code (KUHAP) on joint attacks that caused injury to others.



“The defendant did not just injure others but also caused unrest in the community,” Marliyus said as he read out the verdict on Thursday.



The assault took place on May 29 when dozens of Catholics took part in a rosary prayer session at the house of Julianus Felicianus in Sleman. 



Julianus is the director of the Galang Press publishing house.



Abdul was found guilty of beating Julianus, causing the latter to sustain injuries including broken bones. 



Abdul’s followers also damaged the house and vandalized motorcycles. 



Kompas TV journalist Michael Aryawan, who tried to report the aftermath of the attack, was also targeted by the assailants. 



“The sentence was given considering various aspects including all witness testimonies for the sake of justice,” Marliyus said.



He said factors considered as easing the defendant’s sentence included Abdul admitting his wrongdoing and the fact that he had never been previously convicted.



The sentence was more lenient than the four months demanded by prosecutors.



Both the prosecutors and the defendant’s lawyers said they accepted the verdict.



One of the defendant’s lawyers, Mirzen, however, expressed regret that Julius was not presented as a witness in the court.



“Julius is a key witness. Why wasn’t he examined?” Mirzen said.



Abdul is the caretaker of the Ihya As Sunnah pesantren. His supporters have been attending hearings at his trial since the beginning of proceedings.



Mirzen said he had agreed to accept the verdict because his client had spent three months and 15 days in detention during the legal process, so he could walk free after the trial.



The trial on Thursday was heavily guarded by the military and police over fears of further violence. 



Hundreds of the defendant’s supporters crowded the courtroom.