Conservatives vow to make gay marriage 2012 issue | The Jakarta ...Angered conservatives are vowing to make same-sex marriage a front-burner election issue following the Obama administration's announcement that it will no longer defend the federal law denying recognition to gay married couples.

Conservatives also said they would now expect the eventual 2012 Republican presidential nominee to highlight the marriage debate as part of a challenge to Obama, putting the issue on equal footing with the economy.

On the federal level, opponents f same-sex marriage urged Republican leaders in the House of Representatives to intervene on their own to defend the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act, or DOMA, agaist pending court challenges.

"The ripple effect nationwide will be to galvanize supporters of marriage," said staff counsel Jim Campbell of Alliance Defense Fund, a conservative legal group.

Gay rights activists said Wednesday's announcement from the Justice Department would bolster the prospects forsame-sex marriage in the courts. Democrats in Congress praised Obama's decision and talked of proposing legislation to repeal the law altogether.

On the state level, there were swift repercussions.

In Rhode Island, the Roman Catholic bishop of Providence, Thomas Tobin, said Thursday that his diocese wold "redouble its efforts' to defeat a pending same-sex marriage bill in response to the announcement. In Iowa, conservative activists said the decision would invigorate a campaign to repeal the state's court-ordered same-sex marriage law.

In Maryland, meanwhile, the state Senate was debating a bill that ould make that state the sixth to legalize same-sex marriage - joining Iowa, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont and New Hampshire.

In Congress, Republican House of Representatives leaders gave no immediate indicatin whether they would intervene to defend the federal ban in the ongoing lawsuits, but they harshly criticized Obama's decision.

Many polls show the public almost evenly divided on legalizing same-sex marriage, one reason the issue is so volatile politically.

Though Wednesday's announcement elated gays and infuriated many conservatives, it did not do away with the law, which bars the federal government from recognizing gay marriages and allows states to deny recognition of same-sex unions performed elsewhere. Among its many effects, it forces same-sex married couples to file separate U.S. tax returns, and bars the transfer of federal Social Security benefits to a surviving same-sex spouse.

In California, where the fate of a state same-sex marriage ban - separate from the federal ban - is in the hands of a federal appeals court, gay rights advocates welcomed the administration's action as validation of their plan to get the U.S. Supreme Court to consider the gay marriage issue.

California is among 30 states which have passed constitutional amendments aimed at prohibiting same-sex marriage.

Brian Brown, president of the conservative National Organization for Marriage, predicted that Obama's decision not to defend the federal ban would spur efforts in some of the remaining states to join the ranks of those with constitutional bans.

Indiana lawmakers took a step in that direction last week, and Brown said it was possible that amendments could gain traction in Wyoming, Minnesota, North Carolina and even libertarian-leaning New Hampshire, if Republican lawmakers succeed in repealing the state's same-sex marriage law.

When the Defense of Marriage Act was passed in 1996, a presidential election year, it had broad bipartisan support. Over recent years, Obama has criticized the federal law without fully supporting gay marriage. White House spokesman Jay Carney said this week that the president was "grappling" with the issue but had always personally opposed the federal ban as "unnecessary and unfair."

The Williams Institute, a think tank at the UCLA School of Law, estimates that about 80,000 legally married same-sex couples live in the U.S., including roughly 30,000 who wed in Canada or other foreign countries. An estimated 85,000 same-sex couples have entered civil unions or domestic partnerships, the institute says.

Jon Davidson, legal director of the gay-rights group Lambda Legal, predicted the DOMA announcement would energize opponents of gay marriage, while encouraging the gay community to rally behind Obama all the more eagerly.

"It's hard to imagine that with the repeal of 'don't ask, don't tell' (enabling gays to serve openly in the military) and this decision, there will be anything less than enthusiastic support," he said.