Supreme Court Allows Same-Sex Marriage in Idaho - NYTimes.comWASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Friday allowed same-sex marriages to proceed in Idaho, lifting a temporary stay issued two days earlier by Justice Anthony M. Kennedy.

The developments capped a busy week for gay rights. It started with the court’s refusal on Monday to hear appeals from decisions striking down same-sex marriage bans in Indiana, Oklahoma, Utah, Virginia and Wisconsin. The next day, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, struck down bans in Idaho and Nevada.

The Supreme Court’s orders this week allowed same-sex marriages to proceed in all seven states, raising the number of states in which such unions are lawful to 26, along with the District of Columbia. The legal ripple effects from the various appeals court rulings the Supreme Court tacitly sustained should soon raise that number to 35.

Those ripples reached Colorado and West Virginia this week, where same-sex marriages have already started, and North Carolina, where a federal judge on Friday struck down the state’s ban based on one of the appeals court decisions that the Supreme Court had let stand on Monday.

Justice Kennedy, the member of the court responsible for hearing emergency applications from the Ninth Circuit, entered a temporary stay on Wednesday morning on very short notice after a last-minute request from officials in Idaho. He acted so quickly that he included Nevada in his order.

A few hours later, Justice Kennedy issued a revised order, limiting the stay to Idaho.

In seeking the emergency stay, Idaho officials argued that the Supreme Court should block the Ninth Circuit’s decision because there was “a very strong likelihood that four justices will consider the issue presented here sufficiently meritorious to warrant this court’s review.”

That assertion was hard to reconcile with Monday’s developments, according to lawyers for the gay couples who had brought the suit. Every recent appeals court to rule on the question in the past year found that the Constitution protects a right to same-sex marriage, they said, and the Supreme Court turned away seven petitions seeking review of the question just days before.

The couples’ lawyers added that a stay would inflict deep harm.

“If a stay issues,” they said, the couples “will continue to be denied the right to enter into or have recognized the most important relation in life; they will continue to lack critical legal protections for their families, such as spousal-visitation and medical-decision-making rights in hospitals, that different-sex couples have long enjoyed; and their children will continue to be deprived of the security of knowing that their parents’ relationships are recognized by the state where they live.”

In a response on Friday morning, the Idaho officials said that a denial of their application would send a message. “If the court wishes to signal that its recent denials of various marriage-related petitions was intended to finally and conclusively resolve the constitutionality of state laws defining marriage as a union of man and a woman,” they wrote, “the court should deny Idaho’s application.”

The court’s denial of the application was two sentences long and contained no reasoning.