Appeals Panel Rejects Virginia Gay-Marriage Ban - NYTimes.comAdding to a year of courtroom victories by proponents of same-sex marriage, a federal appeals court on Monday struck down Virginia’s ban on same-sex unions, upholding a lower court’s declaration in February that the state’s restrictive laws were a violation of basic constitutional freedoms.

The 2-to-1 decision by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, Va., followed similar rulings this summer by the circuit court in Denver striking down same-sex marriage bans in Utah and Oklahoma.

These and other rulings expected in coming months from other appeals courts are likely to propel the issue to the Supreme Court, many legal experts anticipate, perhaps as early as this fall, for a decision by spring that would apply nationwide.

In Richmond, Judge Henry F. Floyd, writing for the majority, said denying same-sex couples the right to marry “prohibits them from participating fully in our society, which is precisely the type of segregation that the 14th Amendment cannot countenance.”

Judge Floyd cited the landmark 1967 Supreme Court ruling in Loving v. Virginia, which overturned the state’s law against interracial marriage. That and subsequent decisions described a fundamental “right to marry,” Judge Floyd wrote, that “may stretch to accommodate changing societal norms.”

Emily Schall-Townley, the 16-year-old daughter of two of the plaintiffs in the Virginia case, said she was overjoyed by the decision. “I’ll be able to say without reservation this is my family and these are my two moms,” she said in a telephone conference call.

An unusual aspect of the Virginia case is that the state government and the state attorney general, Mark R. Herring, a Democrat, refused to defend the ban, including a state amendment adopted by the voters in 2006, and even spoke against it in court. Instead, it was left to two court clerks to defend Virginia’s restrictive laws.

Monday’s ruling did not immediately require Virginia or other states in the Fourth Circuit, which includes North Carolina, South Carolina and West Virginia, to begin issuing marriage licenses to gay couples. (Maryland, also in the circuit, already allows same-sex marriage.)

The Virginia clerks were expected to seek a stay of the decision, pending either a rehearing by the full circuit court, or consideration of same-sex marriage by the Supreme Court.

Byron Babione, a lawyer with Alliance Defending Freedom, a conservative legal group that represented one of the clerks, said they were considering their next steps.

In a statement, Mr. Babione praised the dissent by Judge Paul V. Niemeyer, who wrote that “there is no fundamental right to same-sex marriage and there are rational reasons for not recognizing it” and that the decision should be left up to individual states.

In a news conference on Monday, the attorney general of North Carolina, Roy Cooper, a Democrat, said the state would no longer defend its same-sex marriage ban in four court cases because, in light of the appeals court decision, “our law almost surely will be overturned as well.”

But that does not mean that same-sex marriages will soon be offered, he said. “It is time to stop making arguments we will lose and instead move forward,” he said, “knowing that the ultimate resolution will likely come from the U.S. Supreme Court.”

Arguing in Richmond to overturn the Virginia laws were two groups of lawyers and plaintiffs. Acting on behalf of two couples were two prominent lawyers, Theodore B. Olson and David Boies, representing the American Foundation for Equal Rights. A second suit, a class action filed on behalf of all of Virginia’s gay couples, was argued by lawyers from the American Civil Liberties Union and Lambda Legal.

Monday’s ruling is the latest in a year of substantial gains for proponents of same-sex marriage. Through elections or state court decisions, same-sex couples have gained the right to marry in 19 states plus the District of Columbia. But federal and state courts in many other states have ruled against marriage restrictions since the Supreme Court struck down part of the federal Defense of Marriage Act last year, saying no sound reason existed for denying the benefits of marriage to gay and lesbian people and their children.

The next circuit court to take up the issue will be the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati. On Aug. 6, it will hear appeals from Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio and Tennessee, all seeking to void district court rulings overturning their marriage restrictions.

Michael C. Dorf, an expert on constitutional law at the Cornell University Law School, said the Supreme Court was “extremely likely” to choose to hear one or more of the appeals court cases in its coming term, which would result in a decision by June.