How the President Got to 'I Do' on Same-Sex Marriage - NYTimes.comBy presidential fund-raising standards, the dinner at the St. Regis hotel in Washington in April 2011 was an intimate one. President Obama made the rounds, moving among the dozens of people in attendance, including Chad Griffin, a 37-year-old political operative known for his ability to raise money in Hollywood and for his work on trying to legalize same-sex marriage. It was Griffin who persuaded the conservative lawyer Theodore B. Olson and the liberal attorney David Boies, adversaries in the 2000 Bush v. Gore case, to bring a federal lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of California’s Proposition 8, the amendment banning same-sex marriage that voters approved in 2008.

Griffin and a team of veteran political operatives were using the litigation to mount a campaign intended to frame same-sex marriage as a civil right. They were working to create a political climate that would make the Supreme Court, which was disinclined to get too far out in front of public opinion, comfortable enough to rule in their favor. But the president was standing in their way. His opposition to same-sex marriage had been cited repeatedly by Proposition 8’s defenders as evidence that people who wanted to retain the traditional definition of marriage were not motivated by prejudice. Though Obama had recently taken to saying that his views on the matter were “evolving,” Griffin worried that they were moving too slowly to help with his cause.

For Griffin, who grew up in Arkansas and struggled to come out as gay, the legal fight was about more than just the ability to wed. Bans like Proposition 8 sent a signal that there was something inherently wrong with gay men and lesbians and, in his view, amounted to a kind of state sanctioning of a host of ills, from schoolyard bullying to hate crimes to statistics that showed that gay teenagers were far more likely than their straight counterparts to contemplate suicide. As he watched the president move from table to table at the St. Regis, chatting and smiling and taking questions, Griffin waited for his turn. When Obama finally arrived, he willed himself to be direct.

“Mr. President,” he said, “how can we help you evolve more quickly?”

When I spoke with Griffin a few days later, he recalled Obama’s saying, “I think you can tell from what I have done so far the direction that I am headed.” The president was referring to his successful push to repeal the military’s “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, which prohibited openly gay men and lesbians from serving, and his administration’s decision to stop supporting in federal court the Defense of Marriage Act, a Clinton-era law known as DOMA that denied federal spousal benefits to gay couples who married where it was already legal, in five states and the District of Columbia.

“The sense I got from him,” Griffin said, “was, ‘Give me credit — look what I have already done.’ ” But Obama’s campaign for a second term was in full swing, and he was not going to be pushed any further on the issue. A few months later at a fund-raiser in Los Angeles, Griffin had a private conversation with Michelle Obama, in which she indicated that her husband had given as much support as he could at the time.

Her message, he told his team, was clear: “Hang in there with us, and we’ll be with you after the election.”

Despite the president’s stated opposition, even his top advisers didn’t believe that he truly opposed allowing gay couples to marry. “He has never been comfortable with his position,” David Axelrod, then one of his closest aides, told me.

Indeed, long before Obama publicly stated that he was against same-sex marriage, he was on the record supporting it. As an Illinois State Senate candidate from Chicago’s liberal Hyde Park enclave, Obama signed a questionnaire in 1996 saying, “I favor legalizing same-sex marriages, and would fight efforts to prohibit such marriages.” But as his ambitions grew, and with them the need to appeal to a more politically diverse electorate, his position shifted.

In the course of an unsuccessful run for a House seat in 2000, he said he was “undecided” on the question. By the time he campaigned for the presidency, he had staked out an even safer political position: Citing his Christian faith, he said he believed marriage to be the sacred union of a man and a woman.

The assumption going into the 2012 campaign was that there was little to be gained politically from the president’s coming down firmly in favor of same-sex marriage. In particular, his political advisers were worried that his endorsement could splinter the coalition needed to win a second term, depressing turnout among socially conservative African-Americans, Latinos and white working-class Catholics in battleground states.

But by November 2011, it was becoming increasingly clear that continuing to sidestep the issue came with its own set of costs. The campaign’s internal polling revealed that the issue was a touchstone for likely Obama voters under 30. The campaign needed those voters to turn out in the record numbers they had four years earlier, and the biggest impediment was Obama’s refusal to say he favored allowing gay couples to wed.

“We understood that this would be galvanizing to some voters and be difficult with other voters,” said Jim Messina, the manager of Obama’s 2012 campaign.

Caught between countervailing political forces, Obama called his top aides together and said that if asked again for his position, he both wanted and needed to drop the pretense and tell people where he really stood.

“The politics of authenticity — not just the politics, but his own sense of authenticity — required that he finally step forward,” Axelrod said. “And the president understood that.”

But if he was really contemplating an endorsement of same-sex marriage, his advisers urged him to do it in a manner that caused minimal political damage. David Plouffe, a mastermind of the 2008 victory and a senior adviser to the president, reached out to Ken Mehlman for advice. The previous year, Mehlman, a former chairman of the Republican National Committee who engineered President George W. Bush’s re-election, came out as gay and began working with the foundation Griffin set up to fund the Proposition 8 lawsuit, attracting well-known G.O.P. donors, strategists and officials to the cause. Mehlman had already met with Obama over lunch at the White House and told him that people voted for him in 2008 because they viewed him as an idealist who would put politics aside and do what was right. Endorsing same-sex marriage would remind voters that he was still that man. “The notion that politically this is going to kill you — I don’t buy it,” Mehlman recalled saying.

He told Plouffe that voters were far more likely to be supportive once they understood that gay couples wanted to marry for the same reason straight people did: It was a matter of love and commitment. Polling indicated that voters would best respond if the issue was framed around shared American values: the country’s fundamental promise of equality; voters’ antipathy toward government intrusion into their private lives; and the religious principle of treating others the way one would like to be treated.

Mehlman surveyed 5,000 Republicans and Republican-leaning independents and found that a majority supported some form of legal recognition of gay relationships. Generally, marriage was not a top priority for most Republicans, meaning that a presidential endorsement was unlikely to motivate the G.O.P. base or attract the kind of full-throated Republican criticism it might have in years past.

On Nov. 10, 2011, Mehlman sent Plouffe an email suggesting that the president announce his support for same-sex marriage in a TV interview with a female host. He also laid out specific language for Obama to use. Explain that this was a family decision and not a political one, he advised: “Michelle and I have been having a similar conversation in our family that lots of American families have been having on marriage equality.I fully understand that some will agree, while others will disagree, with where our family has come down on this.” Mehlman advised Obama to talk about his daughters — “as Michelle and I have been thinking through what we teach Sasha and Malia about America’s greatness” — and about religious liberty and fairness to all. “When you’re president, you’re president of all Americans. And all includes gays and lesbians — men and women who are serving across this country — firefighters, doctors, teachers, courageous soldiers who serve and protect the rest of us.”

Plouffe responded to the email immediately: “Thanks for this.”

But then nothing happened. A cardinal rule of politics is that if an issue has the potential to cause problems for a candidate, it is best to deal with it well before the election so the dust has time to settle. Yet months went by without Obama making any kind of announcement.

Inside the White House, the first lady urged her husband to declare his support for same-sex marriage. The Obamas had a number of gay friends, and though the White House kept it quiet, the first lady attended a wedding celebration for her hairdresser when he married his husband. She felt strongly that her husband had the power to transform the national conversation on marriage equality. And it was not lost on the president that his failure so far to do that was “a source of disappointment to people who otherwise appreciated him,” Axelrod said. Valerie Jarrett, a longtime friend of the Obamas and a top adviser who served as the president’s liaison to gay voters, also encouraged him to go public. This is consistent with who you are, she told him.

That winter, national polls showed that support for same-sex marriage was beginning to exceed opposition to it. A clear majority of Democrats favored allowing gay couples to wed. Forty-eight major American companies had signed on to a legal brief arguing that the Defense of Marriage Act negatively affected their businesses, and corporate leaders, including the chief executive of Starbucks and the chairman of Goldman Sachs, had come down on the side of marriage equality. The list of Republicans publicly supporting same-sex marriage now included the former first lady Laura Bush; Steve Schmidt, who helped run Senator John McCain’s presidential campaign against Obama in 2008; McCain’s wife and daughter; and Grover Norquist, the conservative anti-tax activist.

But for all the political and corporate cover, Obama’s political advisers remained worried that the costs outweighed the benefits — a fear that intensified as it became clear that North Carolina, a battleground state that Obama narrowly won in 2008, was poised to easily pass a constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage.

“This was so past the sell-by date,” one senior administration official said of the timing of an announcement by the president, “yet there was still no real plan in place. It just shows you how scared everyone was of this issue.”

On April 19, 2012, Chad Griffin was at the Los Angeles home of Michael Lombardo, an HBO executive, and his husband, Sonny Ward, an architect, waiting for the guest of honor to arrive. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was scheduled to meet a group of prominent gay Democrats whom Griffin had helped gather at the request of the Obama campaign.

Mehlman’s exchange with Plouffe had briefly raised Griffin’s hopes that the president would embrace the same-sex marriage cause. But now, with the election looming and nothing to indicate that Obama was willing to heed the advice, he had all but given up on the White House.

Griffin considered asking Biden about the administration’s position on the issue but decided not to bother — he already knew the answer. But as he watched the hosts’ two children, ages 5 and 7, press flowers and a note into Biden’s hand, he changed his mind. They were in the home of two married men and their family. The Obama campaign wanted the support of the gay people in this room. The vice president should have to answer to them. When it was Griffin’s turn to speak, he said: “When you came in tonight, you met Michael and Sonny and their two beautiful kids. And I wonder if you can just sort of talk in a frank, honest way about your own personal views as it relates to equality, but specifically as it relates to marriage equality.”

It was clear from Biden’s body language that the question made him uncomfortable. His public position was no different from the president’s. As a senator, Biden voted for the Defense of Marriage Act. As a presidential candidate himself, he said he supported civil unions. And as the vice president, he had studiously toed the administration’s shifting line.

Biden stood up, flipped his bar stool around so that the back was between him and the rest of the guests and then straddled it. He looked almost pained, Griffin said.

“I look at those two beautiful kids,” Biden began. “I wish everybody could see this. All you got to do is look in the eyes of those kids. And no one can wonder, no one can wonder whether or not they are cared for and nurtured and loved and reinforced. And folks, what’s happening is, everybody is beginning to see it.

“Things are changing so rapidly, it’s going to become a political liability in the near term for an individual to say, ‘I oppose gay marriage.’ Mark my words.”

Having started down this road, he seemed incapable of stopping. People his children’s age could not understand why gay couples should not be allowed to marry, he said. “ ‘I mean, what’s the problem, Dad?’

“And my job — our job — is to keep this momentum rolling to the inevitable.”

The answer stunned everyone in the room, even top aides who were used to the gaffe-prone vice president’s habit of going off script.

“He’d been answering that question the same way for years,” one said. “But being in that house, seeing that couple with their kids, the switch flipped. It was like his hard drive got erased.”

Sitting in his West Wing office more than a year and a half later, the vice president told me that he could still picture that day “like it was 10 minutes ago.”

“It was one of the most poignant questions I had ever been asked in my life,” Biden said. “It ranks up there with when this little girl in Afghanistan was looking at me about two weeks after the Taliban fell, and I was in Kabul, and she looked at me with those beautiful hazel eyes. And I said, ‘Well, I have to leave now.’ And she said: ‘You can’t. You can’t. America can’t leave. I want to be a doctor.’ ”

Griffin was standing against the wall at the Los Angeles gathering, Biden recalled, when he looked at him and said, essentially, “ ‘Well, let me just ask you, Mr. Vice President, what do you think of us?’ And it was like, wow, whoa.”

Biden said it reminded him of a summer afternoon when he was in his 20s. He was sitting on the beach in Delaware with his father and some friends when an older gay couple walked over to say hello. His father, a Realtor, had sold them their apartment in a building nearby. The elder Biden hugged both men and said, “Let me introduce you to my family.” One of the younger Biden’s buddies made a derogatory remark about the couple, and his father’s reaction to it stayed with him all these years.

“He says: ‘As soon as they get in the apartment, you go up to the ninth floor. You walk up and knock on the door, and you apologize to them.’ ” When his friend refused, his father said, “Well, goddamn it, you’re not welcome in my house anymore.”

Biden then described another day, years later, when his own young son looked up at him quizzically after seeing two men headed off to work kiss each other goodbye on a busy street corner. “I said, ‘They love each other, honey,’ and that was it. So it was never anything that was a struggle in my mind.”

The truth was, Biden said, other than being concerned as a Catholic that churches not be forced to perform ceremonies for gay couples, “I didn’t see a problem with it,” and he never had. “It wasn’t like I had an epiphany, as we Catholics say — one day, ‘Oh, my God, I guess there should be gay marriage.’ ” So when Griffin posed that question to him, in the privacy of that home in Los Angeles, Biden decided to say what he actually thought.

Two weeks later, Biden sat down with David Gregory of “Meet the Press.” Gregory asked the vice president whether his outlook on same-sex marriage had changed. With the Los Angeles encounter fresh in his mind, Biden talked about the couple he recently met and the question he was asked, and then he gave pretty much the same answer.

“What this is all about is a simple proposition,” he told Gregory. “Who do you love, and will you be loyal to the person you love? And that’s what people are finding out is what all marriages at their root are about.”

“I, I — look — I am vice president of the United States. The president sets the policy. I am absolutely comfortable with the fact that men marrying men, women marrying women and heterosexual men and women marrying one another are entitled to the same exact rights, all the civil rights, all the civil liberties.”

The interview, which took place on a Friday, was scheduled to be broadcast to the nation that Sunday. In the limousine back from the studio, Shailagh­ Murray, Biden’s communications director, worried as she replayed the interview in her head. Turning to Biden, she said, “I think you may have just gotten in front of the president on gay marriage.”

Political commentators immediately began to speculate that Biden’s remarks were either intended as a trial balloon or had specifically been cleared by the White House to mollify gay voters without the president’s having to take a position. Neither was the case. When the White House press team received a transcript of the interview, tempers flared. Jarrett, who was still hoping that Obama might make a groundbreaking pre-election announcement, accused Biden through an intermediary of disloyalty. Campaign officials were also agitated. “They felt they already were vulnerable,” one White House official told me, “and they had not fully resolved yet what they wanted to do.”

The White House quickly tried to walk back Biden’s comments. “What VP said — that all married couples should have exactly the same legal rights — is precisely POTUS’s position,” Axelrod tweeted on Sunday, May 6, the day Biden’s interview aired. Biden’s office was told to put out a “clarification” echoing that sentiment: “The vice president was expressing that he too is evolving on the issue,” it said.

Though the statements were greeted with outright disbelief by many gay activists, the episode nevertheless seemed “headed into the category of Joe Biden-isms, where the vice president accidentally speaks the truth,” one White House official said. “But then [Education Secretary] Arne Duncan was asked on Monday for his position and answered that he supported same-sex marriage. And then it was like, oh, they are going to ask every single cabinet member.”

Griffin’s question had inadvertently set off a chain reaction. Obama and his team knew that he had to take a stand, soon, or risk looking as if he were “leading from behind,” a portrayal the White House hated.

On Tuesday, the White House hastily offered Robin Roberts of “Good Morning America” an exclusive interview with the president the next day. She was a woman, as Mehlman had suggested, and the White House liked her conversational style. She was also African-American, which provided a chance to reach out to black voters.

Some of Obama’s top advisers urged him to take Biden to task for forcing his hand, but he refused. The first lady saw the whole thing as a blessing in disguise. The endless debate was over. You don’t have to dance around this issue anymore, she told her husband over breakfast on Wednesday, in a conversation she relayed afterward to several top White House officials.

“Enjoy this day,” she said as he headed off for his interview. “You are free.”

But sitting with Roberts in the White House Cabinet Room, Obama did not sound like a man who’d been liberated to say what he truly believed. Even as he made history, he offered what amounted to a carefully calibrated and incremental endorsement, one that had something for both opponents and supporters of same-sex marriage.

North Carolina had, as predicted, recently enshrined a ban on same-sex marriage into its State Constitution, becoming the 30th state to do so. Mindful of the voters there and in other swing states with similar bans, the president emphasized that he had no desire to “nationalize” what he called the “healthy debate” taking place across the country.

“I continue to believe that this is an issue that is going to be worked out at the local level, because historically this has not been a federal issue, what’s recognized as a marriage.”

But as a personal matter, he said, he now believed that gay couples should be able to marry. He told Roberts that he would have “probably” endorsed same-sex marriage before the election, and that the vice president just “got out a little bit over his skis.”

In explaining how his thinking had “evolved,” he hit on many of the poll-tested talking points that Mehlman outlined in the memo he sent months earlier to Plouffe. He brought up Malia and Sasha, and talked about how “it doesn’t make sense to them” that the law treats gay parents of their friends differently from their own. He spoke of the need to respect religious liberty, but said that for him, as a practicing Christian, his faith was rooted “not only [in] Christ sacrificing himself on our behalf, but it’s also the golden rule.” He spoke about the “soldiers or airmen or Marines or sailors who are out there fighting on my behalf and yet feel constrained, even now that ‘don’t ask, don’t tell’ is gone, because they’re not able to commit themselves in a marriage.” And he said that while he respected the views of those who disagreed with him, “I think it’s important to say that in this country, we’ve always been about fairness and treating everybody as equals. I actually think that, you know, it’s consistent with our best and in some cases our most conservative values, sort of the foundation of what made this country great.”

In the months after the announcement, the coalition that Obama needed to win a second term did not crumble. To the campaign’s surprise, Election Day exit polls showed that endorsing same-sex marriage did not hurt him among key constituencies — Catholics and Latinos, for instance, supported it. And the backing motivated Obama’s progressive base, including voters ages 18 to 30, who broke decisively his way. In addition, voters in three states for the first time approved ballot measures legalizing same-sex marriage, while those in a fourth voted down a ban. Mehlman was correct in predicting that it would do little to drive Republican turnout.

As Dan Pfeiffer, the White House communications director at the time, put it: “It was the bomb that didn’t go off.”

In his Inaugural Address on Jan. 21, 2013, Obama drew a straight line from the civil rights fights based on race and gender to the current struggle for marriage equality.

“Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law,” the president said, “for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well.”

Listening, Griffin grew emotional, sensing that, finally, history was bending toward his cause. Like the Federal District Court before it, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit had struck down Proposition 8 as unconstitutional, and the appeal was scheduled to be argued before the Supreme Court that March.

But Griffin’s optimism quickly gave way the next day when Charles J. Cooper, the Washington-based lawyer charged with defending the constitutionality of Proposition 8, filed an opening brief with the Supreme Court, citing the president’s interview with Robin Roberts to argue that bans like Proposition 8 were not motivated by impermissible prejudice. Cooper’s brief quoted Obama as saying that those who opposed same-sex marriage were not coming at it “from a meanspirited perspective,” and it used Obama’s “healthy debate” language to argue that this was a matter for voters and legislatures to decide, not the courts. Later, when Jay Carney, the White House press secretary, was asked whether Obama’s inaugural speech indicated a shift from his position that states should be left to chart their own course on marriage, he said it did not.

Furious, Griffin fired off a sharply worded news release criticizing the statement. He also privately arranged for him and Boies to meet with Jarrett and Kathryn Ruemmler, the White House counsel. Boies and Olson felt it was imperative that Obama take one final step in his evolution, by having his solicitor general file a brief with the Supreme Court clearly stating that the administration believed that bans like Proposition 8 were not just bad policy, but they also violated the Constitution.

In preparing for the White House meeting, Olson encouraged Boies and Griffin to emphasize the importance of the case to Obama’s legacy. But when Griffin asked his friend and former business partner Kristina Schake, who was now the first lady’s communications director, about that strategy, she discouraged it: The president is capable of assessing his legacy without your input, she told him. Focus on the law, she said, and why bringing in the solicitor general would make a difference legally.

At the meeting, Boies did just that, discussing Obama’s inaugural speech in the context of their legal strategy. Now that Obama had said what he said, Boies argued, “silence would not be considered neutral.” It would, in fact, be deeply harmful, signaling that even someone as friendly to gay voters as Obama considered their argument a bridge too far. It could cost them the case.

“It’s already being used against us,” Boies said, citing Cooper’s brief.

Both women seemed impressed by their pleas. But before they left, Boies said, Jarrett made it clear that further lobbying via the press would not be helpful. This was now a legal decision, she said, not a political one.

It would have been unusual for the solicitor general’s office to file a brief in a case like Proposition 8 that did not involve a challenge to a federal law. But Olson had already met with Donald B. Verrilli Jr., the solicitor general, who is responsible for representing the federal government before the Supreme Court, and argued that it was not unprecedented. In the landmark Brown v. Board of Education, the solicitor general’s office filed a brief arguing that state segregation laws were unconstitutional. Olson insisted that there was no less a moral imperative in the Proposition 8 case. “This is one of those ‘What did Daddy do in the war?’ moments,” participants in the meeting recalled him saying.

For Verrilli, the easiest course would have been to sit out the Proposition 8 case. His office had already filed a brief in the federal case on the Defense of Marriage Act, asking the Supreme Court to strike down the law. The justices could find DOMA unconstitutional without declaring a nationwide right for gay couples to marry. The remedy was relatively uncontroversial: Already-married couples would simply start receiving benefits.

But if Verrilli simultaneously argued that gay couples had a fundamental right to marry, he would be pressing the court to strike down bans nationwide, which would complicate the administration’s DOMA strategy. In particular, if Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, whom everyone presumed would cast the deciding vote in the DOMA case, became convinced that the only way he could strike down DOMA was to adopt a rule of law that would force every state in the nation to allow gay couples to wed, he might get cold feet. “We potentially run the risk of losing him,” Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. told me, reflecting on his concerns at the time.

But as he reviewed his options, Verrilli was struck by a memo Olson’s team had put together outlining the similarities between the arguments used more than a century ago defending bans on interracial marriage and those being used today opposing same-sex marriage. The supporters of Proposition 8 contended, for example, that allowing gay couples to wed could harm traditional marriages. The Alabama Supreme Court in 1877 opined that the state must “guard” against the “disturbances” that interracial marriage would produce. Defenders of Proposition 8 also argued that the impact of allowing gay couples to marry was unknown. The commonwealth made the same argument in Loving v. Virginia, which struck down a law prohibiting interracial marriage, saying the court should defer to the wisdom of the states given the “conflicting scientific opinion upon the effects of interracial marriage.” It also mentioned the state’s interest in promoting an optimal child-rearing environment, an argument that Proposition 8 proponents were now making.

Verrilli also turned to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Letter From Birmingham Jail,” which responded to criticism by white clergymen that King’s demands were premature and ill timed. King’s words, about how you can fight a “degenerating sense of ‘nobodiness’ ” for only so long before “the cup of endurance runs over,” resonated. Verrilli studied suicide statistics that reflected the despair felt by many gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender teenagers. When he was finished with his research, he shared his recommendation with Holder: Whatever the risk to the DOMA case, the government should take a stand on Proposition 8.

Holder agreed. In charting the administration’s course forward, he could not help thinking about the past. “The way a gay boy or young gay girl views themselves is similar, again, to the way African-Americans in 1953, ’52, saw themselves when they had to deal with this notion of ‘separate but equal,’ ” he told me. “Staying out was just not consistent with where we wanted to be tactically, legally or morally.”

Holder and Verrilli then met with the president and Ruemmler, his White House counsel, and Denis McDonough, his chief of staff, for more than an hour in the Oval Office to go over the Justice Department’s recommendation. “This was not a briefing,” Holder recalled. “This was a meeting of equals in terms of knowledge of the facts, knowledge of the law.”

The president did not need to be persuaded on the larger moral question; whatever he may have said in the past, he, too, saw the marriage debate through the prism of civil rights, according to Ruemmler and Holder. But Obama wanted to offer Kennedy and the rest of the justices an incremental way to decide the Proposition 8 case that would not force them to overturn bans across the country, a position that he worried the court would find untenable. They arrived at what they referred to as the “eight-state solution.” States needed a justification when they singled out a class of citizens for differential treatment. The plan was to file a brief with the Supreme Court arguing that in states that recognized same-sex domestic partnerships, it was particularly irrational to ban marriage because doing so could not be said to further any governmental interest. In addition to California, that argument would cover Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Nevada, New Jersey, Oregon and Rhode Island. “By the time we leave” that meeting, Holder recalled, “we know what position we’re taking, what our strategy is.”

Shortly before the administration’s brief was filed at 6:30 p.m. on Feb. 28, Ruemmler called Griffin: When the two couples he recruited to challenge Proposition 8 stood before the justices, they would not be standing alone, she said. Standing with them would be the United States government. “The next time I see you will be at the Supreme Court,” she told him. Griffin had no way of knowing that in June, the justices would strike down a central part of DOMA while declining to decide the Proposition 8 case on the merits, effectively permitting same-sex marriages in California. But he did know that his chances had significantly improved.

After hanging up with Ruemmler, he thought back to May 2009, the day he announced the Proposition 8 lawsuit at a news conference in Los Angeles. Afterward, he drove across town to an Obama fund-raiser. When it was his turn to shake the president’s hand, he used the opportunity to begin what would become his mission to win Obama’s support.

“Mr. President, we just filed a case challenging the constitutionality of California’s ban on same-sex marriage,” he recalled saying. “We certainly hope you will be with us on this.” It had taken four years and a profound shift in public opinion, but the president was, at last, with them.