Gay Rights Advocates Celebrate Multiple Victories - NYTimes.comGay rights advocates savored multiple victories on Wednesday, with the first election victories for same-sex marriage in Maine, Maryland and Minnesota, the election in Wisconsin of the nation’s first openly gay senator and the re-election of President Obama, who had taken a risk by endorsing same-sex marriage .

“It truly was a milestone year,” said Chad Griffin, the president of the Human Rights Campaign, which raised millions of dollars for this year’s campaigns. “We had success across the board and across the country.”

In what some called a clear sign that public opinion was shifting, voters in Maine and Maryland endorsed same-sex marriage, the first time that such rights have been approved at the ballot box. In Washington State, where ballots on a similar measure were still trickling in by mail, approval maintained a small lead. Supporters declared victory, saying they were confident that the margin would hold or increase.

While six states and the District of Columbia have legalized same-sex marriage through judicial or legislative decisions, voters elsewhere had rejected it more than 30 times in a row until Tuesday.

Minnesota residents on Tuesday rejected a proposal to amend the State Constitution to define marriage as between a man and a woman; similar measures have been enshrined in the constitutions of 30 states. A state law barring same-sex marriage remains on the books in Minnesota, but with the defeat of the amendment, the door remains open to a change in the law by the Legislature or the courts.

In another sign of shifting attitudes, a drive by social conservatives in Iowa to unseat David S. Wiggins, one of seven State Supreme Court justices who voted unanimously in 2007 to legalize same-sex marriage, fell short. Only two years ago, three other justices who faced similar electoral challenges were voted out as conservatives, supported by out-of-state donations, argued that the court had overstepped its role.

Maine voters, who three years ago rejected a law to authorize same-sex marriage, also reversed themselves. With 85 percent of the ballots counted, the tally stood at 53.2 percent voting yes to 46.8 percent saying no.

Opponents of same-sex marriage, noting that they had been outspent three to one in the state ballot campaigns, vowed to carry on with what they call the defense of traditional marriage. “Though we are disappointed over these losses, we remain faithful to our mission and committed to the cause of preserving marriage as God designed it,” said Brian S. Brown, the president of the National Organization for Marriage.

“We knew long ago that we faced a difficult political landscape with the four marriage battles occurring in four of the deepest blue states in America,” Mr. Brown said in a written statement. “As our opponents built a huge financial advantage, the odds became even steeper.”

In Baltimore, supporters of the measure cheered Tuesday night for Gov. Martin O’Malley, a Democrat who had strongly promoted it. Mr. O’Malley said that the people of the state had come together to say “that every child’s home deserves to be protected equally under the law.” With nearly all of the votes counted, the tally was 52.1 percent for same-sex marriage and 47.9 percent against it.

Derek McCoy, the president of the Maryland Family Alliance, which opposes same-sex marriage, said in a videotaped conversation with the Family Research Council that “we have to concede this issue to the other side at the moment.”

“But that does not mean we’ll go away, or that people do not believe in natural marriage between a man and a woman.”

Until Tuesday, opponents of same-sex marriage had consistently repeated that the issue had lost every time that voters had a voice in the matter. Same-sex marriage has also been blocked in referendums like the Proposition 8 campaign in California in 2008, which only added to the challenge.

Then, when the legislatures in Washington and Maryland approved same-sex marriage bills this year, opponents gathered enough signatures to force the measures on the ballot Tuesday. Gay rights advocates in Maine, still hurting over their loss in 2009, used one-on-one conversations in attempts to change minds. And for the first time anywhere, they brought their own proposal to voters this year. Their victory seems likely to inspire similar campaigns.

Gay rights groups also applauded the election of Representative Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin as the first openly gay senator and the victories of several openly gay members of the House of Representatives.

Opponents of marriage rights were helped in the final weeks of the campaigns by money from the National Organization for Marriage and the Roman Catholic Church. That financing allowed opponents to advertise extensively and organize telephone appeals in all four states. They argued that “redefining marriage” would force schools to “teach gay marriage” and require businesses and churches to violate their religious principles.

Rights groups said they were not seeking to redefine marriage, but simply hoped to end discrimination, and they labeled the opponents’ attacks as scare tactics.

Advocates of same-sex marriage had a threefold advantage in fund-raising nationwide, and they unveiled advertising campaigns of their own in which straight supporters said that their gay and lesbian friends deserved the same chance to marry that others enjoyed.