Virginia's New Attorney General Opposes Ban on Gay Marriage ...Asserting that Virginia had too often been on the “wrong side” of justice on civil rights matters, the state attorney general asked a federal court on Thursday to invalidate the state’s ban on same-sex marriage, calling the law unconstitutional and oppressive.

The move by the attorney general, Mark R. Herring, a Democrat who took office this month, was the first indication of how consequential last November’s elections in Virginia, in which Democrats won all three top elected positions from Republicans, may turn out to be. Mr. Herring, a former state senator, narrowly defeated Mark Obenshain, a Republican state senator.

The decision to drop support for the gay marriage ban was an abrupt shift from the positions taken in the past by the state’s socially conservative elected officials, and put Virginia on a path to be the first Southern state to allow same-sex marriage. Republican officials swiftly denounced the decision, calling for Mr. Herring’s resignation.

At a news conference in Richmond, Mr. Herring said the ban violated the 14th Amendment right to due process and equal protection, an argument that has been the basis of successful legal challenges to same-sex marriage prohibitions in other states.

“I cannot and will not defend a law that violates Virginians’ fundamental constitutional rights,” Mr. Herring said. To do so, he said, “would be a violation of the law and my oath.”

Mr. Herring cited legal cases in which he said Virginia’s leadership had failed its residents by arguing against school desegregation in Brown v. the Board of Education, interracial marriage in Loving v. Virginia, and women’s admission to the Virginia Military Institute, a state-supported military college, in United States v. Virginia.

“Too many times in our history, our citizens have had to lead the way on civil rights while their leaders stood against them,” Mr. Herring said. “This will not be another instance. It is time for the commonwealth to be on the right side of history and the right side of the law.”

The chairman of Virginia’s Republican Party, Pat Mullins, said in a statement that Mr. Herring had turned the issue into “a political farce.”

“The first job of Virginia’s attorney general is to be the commonwealth’s law firm, and to defend the duly passed laws of the commonwealth,” Mr. Mullins said. “If Mark Herring doesn’t want to defend this case, he should resign.”

In 2006, Virginia voters approved a constitutional amendment that defined marriage as being between a man and a woman. Mr. Herring acknowledged Thursday that he had voted for the legislation as a state senator before having a change of heart. “I wouldn’t want the state telling my son or daughter who they could marry,” he said.

He said he now found the ban “oppressive.”

The move follows recent rulings by federal judges in Utah and Oklahoma that struck down laws forbidding same-sex marriage in those states. The rulings came in a legal landscape that has been rapidly changing since the United States Supreme Court abolished California’s same-sex marriage law last year.

Mr. Herring’s announcement, 12 days after he was sworn in, marked a sharp political swing from the previous attorney general, Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, a Republican who ran unsuccessfully for governor on a platform that included opposing same-sex marriage.

Virginia’s new Democratic governor, Terry McAuliffe, has tread cautiously so far in his politically divided state, announcing cabinet appointments with bipartisan appeal.

In announcing his decision, Mr. Herring cited the conservative jurists Robert H. Bork, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justice Antonin Scalia as approving of attorneys general not defending a state law they deemed a violation of the state constitution. Mr. Herring also cited a case that Mr. Cuccinelli chose not to defend because he had found a state law unconstitutional.

As the state legislature commences its annual session in Richmond, Mr. McAuliffe may face rising opposition to his agenda from the Republican-dominated House of Delegates, whose membership is conservative on social issues and are opposed to Mr. McAuliffe’s priority of expanding Medicaid under the federal health care law. The House’s top Republican, William J. Howell, said in a statement that Mr. Herring had disregarded the state’s “legislative and democratic processes” by his decision, setting a “dangerous precedent.”

Mr. Herring said he decided to make the announcement on Thursday because oral arguments in one of the two current legal challenges to the ban are scheduled in federal court in Norfolk on Jan. 30.

The plaintiffs in the case are two couples: Timothy Bostic, an English professor at Old Dominion University, and his partner, Tony C. London; and Carol Schall, director of the Virginia Autism Resource Center at Virginia Commonwealth University, and Mary Townley, who were legally married in California in 2008.

Dr. Schall and Ms. Townley have a 15-year-old daughter, but because Virginia does not recognize their marriage, Dr. Schall is not afforded a number of parental and spousal rights in the state.

The couples are being represented by Theodore B. Olson and David Boies, who successfully argued against California’s same-sex marriage ban before the Supreme Court last year.